Quantum and Classical Integrable Systems
M.A. Semenov-Tian-Shansky
1

arXiv:q-alg/9703023v1 12 Mar 1997

2

Physique Mathématique, Université de Bourgogne, Dijon, France
Steklov Mathematical Institute, St.Petersburg, Russia

Abstract. The key concept discussed in these lectures is the relation between the Hamiltonians of a
quantum integrable system and the Casimir elements in the underlying hidden symmetry algebra. (In
typical applications the latter is either the universal enveloping algebra of an affine Lie algebra, or its
q-deformation.) A similar relation also holds in the classical case. We discuss different guises of this
very important relation and its implication for the description of the spectrum and the eigenfunctions
of the quantum system. Parallels between the classical and the quantum cases are thoroughly discussed.

1

Introduction

The study of exactly solvable quantum mechanical models is at least as old as Quantum Mechanics itself. Over the last fifteen years there has been a major development aimed at a unified
treatment of many examples known previously and, more importantly, at a systematic construction of new ones. The new method nicknamed the Quantum Inverse Scattering Method
was largely created by L. D. Faddeev and his school in St. Petersburg as a quantum counterpart
of the Classical Inverse Scattering Method, and has brought together many ideas believed to be
unrelated. [Besides the Classical Inverse Scattering Method, one should mention the profound
results of R.Baxter in Quantum Statistical Mechanics (which, in turn, go back to the work of
L. Onsager, E. Lieb and many others) and the seminal paper of H. Bethe on the ferromagnet
model in which the now famous Bethe Ansatz was introduced.] It also allowed to unravel highly
nontrivial algebraic structures, the Quantum Group Theory being one of its by-products.
The origins of QISM lie in the study of concrete examples; it is designed as a working
machine which produces quantum systems together with their spectra, the quantum integrals of
motion, and their joint eigenvectors. In the same spirit, the Classical Inverse Scattering Method
(along with its ramifications) is a similar tool to produce examples of classical integrable systems
together with their solutions. In these lectures it is virtually impossible to follow the historic way
in which this method has been developed, starting with the famous papers of Gardner, Greene,
Kruskal and Miura (1967), and Lax (1968). (A good introduction close to the ideas of QISM may
be found in (Faddeev and Takhtajan (1987)).) I would like to comment only on one important
turning point which gave the impetus to invent the Quantum Inverse Scattering Method. In
1979 L. D. Faddeev exposed in his seminar the draft paper of B. Kostant on the quantization
of the Toda lattice (Kostant (1979)) which reduced the problem to the representation theory of
semisimple Lie groups. This was an indication that classical completely integrable systems have
an intimate relation to Lie groups and should also have exactly solvable quantum counterparts.
In the same talk Faddeev introduced the now famous RL1 L2 = L2 L1 R commutation relations

2

M.A. Semenov-Tian-Shansky

for quantum Lax matrices which could be extracted from R. Baxter’s works on quantum transfer
matrices. The research program outlined in that talk and implemented over the next few years
was twofold: On the one hand, the Yang-Baxter equation and the related algebra have directly
led to exact solutions of several quantum models, such as the quantum sine-Gordon equation. On
the other hand, connections with group theory and the orbits method resulted in a systematic
treatment of numerous examples in the classical setting (Reyman and Semenov-Tian-Shansky
(1994)). One major problem which has remained unsettled for more than a decade is to fill the
gap between the two approaches, and in particular, to explain the group theoretical meaning
of the Bethe Ansatz.
With hindsight we can now understand why this problem could not be resolved immediately.
First of all, while classical integrable systems are related to ordinary Lie groups, quantum
systems quite often (though not always, cf. the discussion in section 3) require the full machinery
of Quantum Groups. The background took several years to prepare (Drinfeld (1987a)). Second,
even the simplest systems such as the open Toda lattice require a very advanced technique
of representation theory (Kostant (1979), Semenov-Tian-Shansky (1994a)). The Toda lattice is
peculiar, since the underlying ’hidden symmetry’ group is finite-dimensional. All main examples
are related to (classical or quantum) affine Lie algebras. The representation theory of affine
algebras which is instrumental in the study of integrable systems has been developed only in
recent years (semi-infinite cohomologies,Wakimoto modules, critical level representations, cf.
Feigin and Frenkel (1992), Feigin, Frenkel and Reshetikhin (1994), Frenkel (1995)).
The present lectures do not give a systematic overview of the Quantum Inverse Scattering
Method (several good expositions are available, cf. Bogolyubov et al. (1994), Faddeev (1980,
1984, 1995), Faddeev and Takhtajan (1979), Kulish and Sklyanin (1981), Sklyanin (1992)).
Instead, I shall try to explain the parallels between quantum and classical systems and the
’correspondence principles’ which relate the quantum and the classical case.
As already mentioned, the first key observation is that integrable systems always have
an ample hidden symmetry. (Fixing this symmetry provides some rough classification of the
associated examples. A nontrivial class of examples is related to loop algebras or, more generally,
to their q-deformations. This is the class of examples I shall consider below.) Two other key
points are the role of (classical or quantum) R-matrices and of the Casimir elements which give
rise to the integrals of motion.
This picture appears in several different guises depending on the type of examples in question. The simplest (so-called linear) case corresponds to classical systems which are modelled
on coadjoint orbits of Lie algebras; a slightly more complicated group of examples is classical
systems modelled on Poisson Lie groups or their Poisson submanifolds. In the quantum setting
the difference between these two cases is deeper: while in the former case the hidden symmetry
algebra remains the same, quantization of the latter leads to Quantum Groups. Still, for loop
algebras the quantum counterpart of the main construction is nontrivial even in the linear case;
the point is that the universal enveloping algebra of a loop algebra has a trivial center which
reappears only after central extension at the critical value of the central charge. Thus to tackle
the quantum case one needs the full machinery of representation theory of loop algebras. (By
contrast, in the classical case one mainly deals with the evaluation representations which allow
to reduce the solution of the equations of motion to a problem in algebraic geometry.)

Quantum and Classical Integrable Systems

3

The study of integrable models may be divided into two different parts. The first one is,
so to say, kinematic: it consists in the choice of appropriate models together with their phase
spaces or the algebra of observables and of their Hamiltonians. The second one is dynamical; it
consists, classically, in the description of solutions or of the action-angle variables. The quantum counterpart consists in the description of the spectra, the eigenvectors, and of the various
correlation functions. The algebraic scheme proved to be very efficient in the description of kinematics. (Quantum Group Theory may be regarded as a by-product of this kinematic problem.)
The description of spectra at the present stage of the theory remains model dependent. The
standard tool for constructing the eigenvectors of the quantum Hamiltonians which was the
starting point of QISM is the algebraic Bethe Ansatz. Until very recently, its interpretation in
terms of the representation theory was lacking. This problem has been finally settled by Feigin,
Frenkel and Reshetikhin (1994) for an important particular model with linear commutation relations (the Gaudin model); remarkably, their results follow the general pattern outlined above.
A similar treatment of quantum models related to q-deformed affine algebras is also possible,
although the results in this case are still incomplete. One should be warned that much of the
’experimental material’ on Quantum Integrability still resists general explanations. I would like
to mention in this respect the deep results of E.K.Sklyanin (Sklyanin (1992), Sklyanin (1995))
relating the Bethe Ansatz to the separation of variables; see also (Harnad and Winternitz
(1993), Kuznetsov (1994)).
Acknowledgements. The present lectures were prepared for the CIMPA Winter School on
Nonlinear Systems which was held in Pondicherry, India, in January 1996. I am deeply grateful
to the Organizing Committee of the School and to the staff of the Pondicherry University for
their kind hospitality. I would also like to thank Prof. Y. Kosmann-Schwarzbach for her remarks
on the draft text of these lectures.

2

Generalities

A quantum mechanical system is a triple consisting of an associative algebra with involution
A called the algebra of observables, an irreducible ⋆-representation π of A in a Hilbert space
H and a distinguished self-adjoint observable H called the Hamiltonian. A typical question to
study is the description of the spectrum and the eigenvectors of π(H). Quantum mechanical
systems usually appear with their classical counterparts. By definition, a classical mechanical
system is again specified by its algebra of observables Acl which is a commutative associative
algebra equipped with a Poisson bracket (i.e., a Lie bracket which also satisfies the Leibniz rule
{a, bc} = {a, b} c + {a, c} b;
in other words, a Poisson bracket is a derivation of Acl with respect to both its arguments), and
a Hamiltonian H ∈ Acl . A commutative algebra equipped with a Poisson bracket satisfying the
Leibniz rule is called a Poisson algebra. Speaking informally, a quantum algebra of observables
A arises as a deformation of the commutative algebra Acl determined by the Poisson bracket.

4

M.A. Semenov-Tian-Shansky

In these lectures we shall not be concerned with the quantization problem in its full generality
(cf. Bayen, Flato et al. (1977), Weinstein (1994)). However, it will always be instructive to
compare quantum systems with their classical counterparts.
The algebraic language which starts with Poisson algebras makes the gap between classical
and quantum mechanics as narrow as possible; in practice, however, we also need the dual
language based on the notion of the phase space. Roughly speaking, the phase space is the
spectrum of the Poisson algebra. Accurate definition depends on the choice of a topology in
the Poisson algebra. We shall not attempt to discuss these subtleties and shall always assume
that the underlying phase space is a smooth manifold and that the Poisson algebra is realized
as the algebra of functions on this manifold. In the examples we have in mind, Poisson algebras
always have an explicit geometric realization of this type. The Poisson bracket itself is then as
usual represented by a bivector field on the phase space satisfying certain differential constraints
which account for the Jacobi identity. This gives the definition of a Poisson manifold which is
dual to the notion of a Poisson algebra. Geometry of Poisson manifolds has numerous obvious
parallels with the representation theory. Recall that the algebraic version of the representation
theory is based on the study of appropriate ideals in an associative algebra. For a Poisson
algebra we have a natural notion of a Poisson ideal (i.e., a subalgebra which is an ideal with
respect to both structures); the dual notion is that of a Poisson submanifold of a Poisson
manifold. The classical counterpart of Hilbert space representations of an associative algebra is
the restriction of functions to various Poisson submanifolds. Poisson submanifolds are partially
ordered by inclusion; minimal Poisson submanifolds are those for which the induced Poisson
structure is nondegenerate. (This means that the center of the Lie algebra of functions contains
only constants.) Minimal Poisson submanifolds always carry a symplectic structure and form a
stratification of the Poisson manifold; they are called symplectic leaves. Restriction of functions
to symplectic leaves gives a classical counterpart of the irreducible representations of associative
algebras.
Let M be a Poisson manifold, H ∈ C ∞ (M). A classical system (M, H) is called integrable
if the commutant of the Hamiltonian H in Acl contains an abelian algebra of the maximal
possible rank. (A technical definition is provided by the well known Liouville theorem.)
Let us recall that the key idea which has started the modern age in the study of classical
integrable systems is to bring them into Lax form. In the simplest case, the definition of a Lax
representation may be given as follows. Let (A, M, H) be a classical mechanical system. Let
Ft : M → M be the associated flow on M (defined at least locally). Suppose that g is a Lie
algebra. A mapping L : M → g is called a Lax representation of (A, M, H) if the following
conditions are satisfied:
(i) The flow Ft factorizes over g, i.e., there exists a (local) flow Ft : g → g such that the
following diagram is commutative.
Ft
M
M −→
|
|
L
↓
↓ L
F

t
g
g −→

(ii) The quotient flow Ft on g is isospectral, i.e., it is tangent to adjoint orbits in g.

Quantum and Classical Integrable Systems

5

Clearly, L(x) ∈ g for any x ∈ M ; hence we may regard L as a ’matrix with coefficients
in A = C ∞ (M)’, i.e., as an element of g ⊗A; the Poisson bracket on A extends to g ⊗A by
linearity. Property (ii) means that there exists an element M ∈ g ⊗ A such that {H, L} =
[L, M ].
Let (ρ, V ) be a (finite-dimensional) linear representation of g. Then LV = ρ ⊗ id(L) ∈
EndV ⊗ A is a matrix valued function on M; the coefficients of its characteristic polynomial
P (λ) = det(LV − λ) are integrals of the motion.
One may replace in the above definition a Lie algebra g with a Lie group G; in that case
isospectrality means that the flow preserves conjugacy classes in G. In a more general way, the
Lax operator may be a difference or a differential operator. The difference case is of particular
importance, since the quantization of difference Lax equations is the core of QISM and a natural
source of Quantum Groups. (Cf. section 3 below)
There is no general way to find a Lax representation for a given system (even if it is known
to be completely integrable). However, there is a systematic way to produce examples of such
representations. An ample source of such examples is provided by the general construction
described in the next section.
2.1

Basic Theorem: Linear Case

The basic construction outlined in this section (summarized in Theorem 2.3 below) goes back
to Kostant (1979) and Adler (1979) in some crucial cases; its relation with the r-matrix method
was established in (Semenov-Tian-Shansky (1983)). We shall state it using the language of
symmetric algebras which simplifies its generalization to the quantum case. Let g be a Lie
algebra over k (where k = R or C). Let S(g) be the symmetric algebra of g. Recall that
there is a unique Poisson bracket on S (g) (called the Lie-Poisson bracket) which extends the
Lie bracket on g (see, for example, (Cartier (1994)). This Poisson bracket is more frequently
discussed from the ’spectral’ point of view. Namely, let g∗ be the linear dual of g; the natural
pairing g × g∗ → k extends to the ’evaluation map’ S (g) × g∗ → k which induces a canonical
isomorphism of S (g) with the space of polynomials P (g∗ ) ; thus g∗ is a linear Poisson manifold
and S (g) ≃ P (g∗ ) is the corresponding algebra of observables. Linear functions on g∗ form a
subspace in P (g∗ ) which may be identified with g. The Lie-Poisson bracket on g∗ is uniquely
characterized by the following properties:
1. The Poisson bracket of linear functions on g∗ is again a linear function.
2. The restriction of the Poisson bracket to g ⊂ P (g∗ ) coincides with the Lie bracket in g.
Besides the Lie-Poisson structure on S(g) we shall need its Hopf structure. Further on we
shall deal with other more complicated examples of Hopf algebras, so it is probably worth
recalling the general definitions (though we shall not use them in full generality until section
4). Recall that a Hopf algebra is a set (A, m, ∆, ǫ, S) consisting of an associative algebra A over
k with multiplication m : A ⊗ A → A and unit element 1, the coproduct ∆ : A → A ⊗ A, the
counit ǫ : A → k and the antipode S : A → A which satisfy the following axioms

6

M.A. Semenov-Tian-Shansky

– m : A ⊗ A → A, ∆ : A → A ⊗ A, i : k → A : α 7−→ α · 1, ǫ : A → k are homomorphisms of
algebras.
– The following diagrams are commutative:

id⊗m
A
→
A⊗ A
A ⊗ A⊗A → A⊗A
|
|
|
| ,
,
∆
∆⊗id
m⊗id
↓
↓
↓
↓
id⊗∆
A ⊗A
→
A
A⊗A → A⊗A ⊗ A

(2.1)

(these diagrams express associativity of the product m and the coassociativity of the coproduct
∆, respectively),
i⊗id

id⊗i

A ⊗ A ←− A ⊗ k A ⊗ A ←− A ⊗ k
|
|
|
|
,
, m
m
↓
↓
↓
↓
A

id

←−

id

A

A

←−

A

ǫ⊗id

id⊗ǫ

A ⊗ A −→ A ⊗ k A ⊗ A −→ A ⊗ k
↑
|
|
∆ ↑
, ∆
|
↓
|
↓
A

id

−→

(2.2)

id

A

A

−→

(2.3)

A

(these diagrams express, respectively, the properties of the unit element 1 ∈ A and of the counit
ǫ ∈ A∗ ).
– The antipode S is an antihomomorphism of algebras and the following diagrams are commutative:
∆
id⊗S
m
A −→ A ⊗ A −→ A ⊗ A −→ A
ցǫ

i

,

ր

(2.4)

k
∆

S⊗id

m

A −→ A ⊗ A −→ A ⊗ A −→ A
ցǫ

րi

.

(2.5)

k
If (A, m, 1, ∆, ǫ, S) is a Hopf algebra, its linear dual A∗ is also a Hopf algebra; moreover,
the coupling A ⊗ A∗ → k interchanges the roles of product and coproduct. Thus we have
hm (a ⊗ b) , ϕi = ha ⊗ b, ∆ϕi .

Quantum and Classical Integrable Systems

7

The Hopf structure on the symmetric algebra S (g) is determined by the structure of the
additive group on g∗ . Namely, let S (g) × g∗ → k : (a, X) 7−→ a (X) be the evaluation map;
since S (g) ⊗ S (g) ≃ S (g ⊕ g) ≃ P (g∗ ⊕ g∗ ) , this map extends to S (g) ⊗ S (g) . We have
∆a (X, Y ) = a (X + Y ) , ǫ (a) = a (0) , S (a) (X) = a (−X)

(2.6)

(we shall sometimes write S (a) = a′ for brevity).
For future reference we recall also that the coproducts in the universal enveloping algebra U (g) and in S (g) coincide (in other words, U (g) is canonically isomorphic to S (g) as a
coalgebra).
Let us now return to the discussion of the Poisson structure on S (g) , i.e., of the Lie-Poisson
bracket of the Lie algebra g. It is well known that the Lie-Poisson bracket is always degenerate;
its symplectic leaves are precisely the coadjoint orbits of the corresponding Lie group.
Proposition 2.1 The center of S(g) (regarded as a Poisson algebra) coincides with the subalgebra I = S(g)g of adg-invariants in S(g) (called Casimir elements).
Restrictions of Casimir elements to symplectic leaves are constants; so fixing the values of
Casimirs provides a rough classification of symplectic leaves, although it is not true in general
that different symplectic leaves are separated by the Casimirs. (In the semisimple case there
are enough Casimirs to separate generic orbits.)
Fix an element H ∈ S (g) ; it defines a derivation DH of S (g) ,
DH ϕ = {H, ϕ} .
By duality, this derivation determines a (local) Hamiltonian flow on g∗ . Since the Lie-Poisson
bracket on g∗ is degenerate, this flow splits into a family of independent flows which are confined
to Poisson submanifolds in g∗ . Thus a Hamiltonian H defines Hamiltonian flows on the coadjoint
orbits in g∗ . In the special case when H ∈ I all these flows are trivial. However, one may still
use Casimir elements to produce nontrivial equations of motion if the Poisson structure on S(g)
is properly modified, and this is the way in which Lax equations associated with g do arise.
The formal definition is as follows.
Let r ∈ End g be a linear operator; we shall say that r is a classical r-matrix if the r-bracket
[X, Y ]r =

1
([rX, Y ] + [X, rY ]) , X, Y ∈ g,
2

(2.7)

satisfies the Jacobi identity. In that case we get two different Lie brackets on the same underlying
linear space g. We shall assume that r satisfies the following stronger condition called the
modified classical Yang-Baxter identity:
[rX, rY ] − r ([rX, Y ] + [X, rY ]) = − [X, Y ] , X, Y ∈ g.

Proposition 2.2 Identity (2.8) implies the Jacobi identity for (2.7).

(2.8)

8

M.A. Semenov-Tian-Shansky

Remark 2.1 Identity (2.8) is of course only a sufficient condition; however, we prefer to impose it from the very beginning, since it assures a very important factorization property (see
below).
Let (g, r) be a Lie algebra equipped with a classical r-matrix r ∈ Endg satisfying (2.8) . Let
gr be the corresponding Lie algebra (with the same underlying linear space). Put r± = 21 (r±id);
then (2.8) implies that r± : gr → g are Lie algebra homomorphisms. Let us extend them to
Poisson algebra morphisms S(gr ) → S(g) which we shall denote by the same letters. These
morphisms also agree with the standard Hopf structure on S(g), S(gr ). Define the action
S(gr ) ⊗ S(g) → S(g)
by setting
x·y =
where ∆x =

P

(1)

xi

(2)

⊗ xi

X

(1)

(2)

r+ (xi ) y r− (xi )′ , x ∈ S(gr ), y ∈ S(g),

(2.9)

is the coproduct and a 7→ a′ is the antipode map.

Theorem 2.3 (i) S(g) is a free graded S(gr )-module generated by 1 ∈ S(g). (ii) Let ir : S(g)
→ S(gr ) be the induced isomorphism of graded linear spaces; its restriction to I = S(g)g is a
morphism of Poisson algebras. (iii) Assume, moreover, that g is equipped with a nondegenerate invariant bilinear form; the induced mapping g∗r → g defines a Lax representation for all
b H
b ∈ S(g)g .
Hamiltonians H = ir (H),

The geometric meaning of theorem 2.3 is very simple. In fact, it becomes more transparent
if one uses the language of Poisson manifolds rather than the dual language of Poisson algebras.
(However, it is this more cumbersome language that may be generalized to the quantum case.)
Since g ≃ gr as linear spaces, the polynomial algebras P (g∗ ) and P (g∗r ) are also isomorphic
as graded linear spaces (though not as Poisson algebras). The subalgebra I ⊂ P (g∗ ) remains
commutative with respect to the Lie-Poisson bracket of gr ; moreover, the flows in g∗ which
correspond to the Hamiltonians H ∈ I are tangent to two systems of coadjoint orbits in g∗ , the
orbits of g and of gr . The latter property is trivial, since all Hamiltonian flows in g∗r are tangent
g
to coadjoint orbits; the former is an immediate corollary of the fact that I = S(g)g ≃P (g∗ )
is the subalgebra of coadjoint invariants. (As we mentioned, in the semisimple case generic
orbits are level surfaces of the Casimirs.) Finally, if g carries an invariant inner product, the
coadjoint and the adjoint representations of g are equivalent and I consists precisely of spectral
invariants.
Let u ⊂ gr be an ideal, s = gr /u the quotient algebra, p : S (gr ) → S (s) the canonical projection; restricting p to the subalgebra Ir = ir (S(g)g ) we get a Poisson commutative subalgebra
in S (s) ; we shall say that the corresponding elements of S (s) are obtained by specialization.
The most common examples of classical r-matrices are associated with decompositions of
Lie algebras. Let g be a Lie algebra with a nondegenerate invariant inner product, g+ , g− ⊂ g
its two Lie subalgebras such that g = g+ +̇g− as a linear space. Let P+ , P− be the projection
operators associated with this decomposition; the operator
r = P+ − P−

(2.10)

Quantum and Classical Integrable Systems

9

satisfies (2.8); moreover, the Lie algebra gr splits into two parts, gr ≃ g+ ⊕ g− . Let us choose
⊥
A = S(g+ ) as our algebra of observables. Let g⊥
+ , g− be the orthogonal complements of g+ , g−
⊥
⊥
∗
⊥ ∗
⊥
⊥
⊥
in g. Then g = g+ ⊕g− and we may identify
P g+ ≃ ig− , g− ≃ g+i . Let L ∈ g− ⊗ g+ ⊂ g− ⊗ S(g+ )
be the canonical element (that is, L =
ei ⊗ e , where e is a basis in g+ and {ei } the
∗
⊥
∗
⊥
dual basis in g+ ≃ g− ); using the canonical isomorphism g⊥
− ⊗ g+ ≃ Hom g+ , g− , we may
∗
⊥
regard L as an embedding g+ ֒→ g− . Let P : S(g) → S(g− ) be the projection onto S(g− ) in
the decomposition
S(g) = S(g− ) ⊕ g+ S(g).
Corollary 2.4 (i) The restriction of P to the subalgebra I = S(g)g of Casimir elements is a
Poisson algebra homomorphism. (ii) L defines a Lax representation for all Hamiltonian equations of motion defined by the Hamiltonians H = P (H), H ∈ I . (iii) The corresponding
Hamiltonian flows on g∗+ ≃ g⊥
− ⊂g preserve intersections of coadjoint orbits of g+ with the
adjoint orbits of g.
One sometimes calls L the universal Lax operator; restricting the mapping L : g∗+ ֒→ g⊥
− to
various Poisson submanifolds in g∗+ we get Lax representations for particular systems.
The situation is especially simple when g+ , g− ⊂ g are isotropic subspaces with respect to
⊥
∗
the inner product in g; then g+ = g⊥
+ , g− = g− , g+ ≃ g− . In that case (g+ , g− , g) is referred
to as a Manin triple. This case is of particular importance, since then both g and its Lie
subalgebras g+ , g− carry an additional structure of Lie bialgebra.
Definition 2.1 Let a be a Lie algebra, a∗ its dual; assume that a∗ is equipped with a Lie
bracket [, ]∗ : a∗ ∧ a∗ → a∗ . The brackets on a and a∗ are said to be compatible if the dual map
δ : a → a ∧ a is a 1-cocycle on a (with values in the wedge square of the adjoint module). A pair
(a, a∗ ) with consistent Lie brackets is called a Lie bialgebra.
One can prove that this definition is actually symmetric with respect to a, a∗ ; in other words,
if (a, a∗ ) is a Lie bialgebra, so is (a∗ , a) .
Proposition 2.5 Let (g+ , g− , g) be a Manin triple. Identify g∗ with g by means of the inner
∗
product and equip it with
 the r-bracket associated with∗ r = P+ − P− ; then (i) (g, g∗ ) is a Lie
bialgebra. (ii) g+ , g− is a Lie sub-bialgebra of (g, g ) . (iii) Conversely, if (a, a ) is a Lie
bialgebra there exists a unique Lie algebra d = d (a, a∗ ) called the double of (a, a∗ ) such that
– d = a+̇a∗ as a linear space,
– a, a∗ ⊂ d are Lie subalgebras,
– The canonical bilinear form on d induced by the natural pairing between a and a∗ is add
-invariant.
In a more general way, let r ∈ Endg be a classical r-matrix on a Lie algebra g which is
equipped with a fixed inner product. Identify gr with the dual of g by means of the inner
product. Assume that r is skew and satisfies the modified Yang-Baxter identity. Then (g, g∗ )
is a Lie bialgebra; it is usually called a factorizable Lie bialgebra. Let us once more list the
properties of factorizable Lie bialgebras for future reference:

10

M.A. Semenov-Tian-Shansky

– g is equipped with a nondegenerate inner product.
– g∗ is identified with g as a linear space by means of the inner product; the Lie bracket in g∗
is given by
1
[X, Y ]∗ = ([rX, Y ] + [X, rY ]) , X, Y ∈ g,
2
∗
= −r− , and r+ −
– r± = 21 (r ± id) are Lie algebra homomorphisms g∗ → g ; moreover, r+
r− = id.

Lie bialgebras are particularly important, since the associated Lie-Poisson structures may
be extended to Lie groups (cf. section 3).
2.1.1. Hamiltonian Reduction. Theorem 2.3 admits a very useful global version which
survives quantization. To formulate this theorem we shall first recall some basic facts about
Hamiltonian reduction.
Let G be a Lie group with Lie algebra g. Let T ∗ G be the cotangent bundle of G equipped
with the canonical symplectic structure. Let B ⊂ G be a Lie subgroup with Lie algebra b. The
action of B on G by right translations extends canonically to a Hamiltonian action B × T ∗ G
→ T ∗ G. This means that the vector fields on T ∗ G generated by the corresponding infinitesimal
action of b are globally Hamiltonian; moreover, the mapping
b → C ∞ (T ∗ G) : X 7−→ hX
which assigns to each X ∈ b the Hamiltonian of the corresponding vector field is a homomorphism of Lie algebras. In particular, this map is linear and hence for each X ∈ g, x ∈ T ∗ G
hX (x) = hX, µ (x)i ,
where µ : T ∗ G → b∗ is the so-called moment mapping. Choose a trivialization T ∗ G≃G×g∗ by
means of left translations; then the action of B is given by


−1
b : (g, ξ) 7−→ gb−1 , (Ad∗ b) ξ .

The corresponding moment map µ : T ∗ G → b∗ is

µ : (g, ξ) 7−→ −ξ |b ,
where ξ |b means the restriction of ξ ∈ g∗ to b ⊂ g. The moment mapping is equivariant; in
other words, the following diagram is commutative
B × T ∗G → T ∗G
↓
↓
,
B × b∗ → b∗
where B × b∗ → b∗ is the ordinary coadjoint action.
Recall that the reduction procedure consists of two steps:

Quantum and Classical Integrable Systems

11

– Fix the value of the moment map µ and consider the level surface
MF = {x ∈ T ∗ G; µ (x) = F } , F ∈ b∗
Speaking in physical terms, we impose on T ∗ G linear constraints which fix the moment
µ : T ∗ G → b∗ .
– Take the quotient of MF over the action of the stabilizer of F in B.
(Due to the equivariance of µ, the stabilizer B F ⊂ B preserves MF .)
The resulting manifold MF is symplectic; it is called the reduced phase space obtained by
reduction over F ∈ b∗ . A particularly simple case is the reduction over 0 ∈ b∗ ; in that case the
stabilizer coincides with B itself. We shall denote the reduced space M0 /B by T ∗ G//B.
In a slightly more general fashion, we may start with an arbitrary Hamiltonian B-space M
and perform the reduction over the zero value of the moment map getting the reduced space
M//B.
Let SG be the category of Hamiltonian G-spaces; recall that (up to a covering) homogeneous
Hamiltonian G-spaces are precisely the coadjoint orbits of G. We shall define a functor (called
symplectic induction, cf. Kazhdan, Kostant and Sternberg (1978)),
IndG
B : SB

SG ,

which associates to each Hamiltonian B-space a Hamiltonian G-space. Namely, we put
∗
IndG
B (M) = T G × M//B,

where the manifold T ∗ G × M is equipped with the symplectic structure which is the difference
of symplectic forms on T ∗ G and on M and B acts on T ∗ G × M diagonally (hence the moment
map on T ∗ G × M is the difference of the moment maps on T ∗ G and on M). The structure
of the Hamiltonian G-space is induced on T ∗ G × M//B by the action of G on T ∗ G by left
translations.
The most simple case of symplectic induction is when the coadjoint orbit consists of a single
point. In representation theory, this corresponds to representations induced by 1-dimensional
representations of a subgroup. Let now F ∈ b∗ be an arbitrary element; let OF be its coadjoint
orbit, KF = IndG
B (OF ) . It is sometimes helpful to have a different construction of KF (in much
the same way as in representation theory it is helpful to have different realizations of a given
representation). In many case it is possible to induce KF starting from a smaller subgroup L ⊂ B
and its single-point orbit (a similar trick in representation theory means that we wish to induce
a given representation from a 1-dimensional one). The proper choice of L is the Lagrangian
subgroup LF ⊂ B subordinate to F (whenever it exists). Recall that a Lie subalgebra lF ⊂ b
is called a Lagrangian subalgebra subordinate to F ∈ b∗ if ad∗ lF · F ⊂ TF OF is a Lagrangian
subspace of the tangent space to the coadjoint orbit of F (with respect to the Kirillov form
on TF OF ). This condition implies that F |[lF ,lF ] = 0; in other words, F defines a character of
lF . This is of course tantamount to saying that F is a single-point orbit of lF . To define the
corresponding Lagrangian subgroup LF ⊂ B let us observe that lF always coincides with its
own normalizer in b. Let us define LF ⊂ B as the normalizer of lF in B (this definition fixes
the group of components of LF which may be not necessarily connected).

12

M.A. Semenov-Tian-Shansky

Proposition 2.6 Let LF ⊂ B be a Lagrangian subgroup subordinate to F ; then T ∗ G×OF //B ≃
T ∗ G × {F } //LF .
In the next section we shall discuss an example of a coadjoint orbit with real polarization.
Let us now return to the setting of theorem 2.3. Consider the action G × G × G → G by
left and right translations:
(h, h′ ) : x 7−→ hxh′−1 ;
(2.11)
this action may be lifted to the Hamiltonian action G × G × T ∗ G → T ∗ G. Let us choose again
a trivialization T ∗ G ≃ G × g∗ by means of left translations; then


−1
(h, h′ ) : (g, ξ) 7−→ hgh′−1 , (Ad∗ h′ ) ξ .
(2.12)
The corresponding moment map µ : T ∗ G → g∗ ⊕g∗ is


µ : (g, ξ) 7−→ ξ, − (Ad∗ g)−1 ξ .

(2.13)

Using the left trivialization of T ∗ G we may extend polynomial functions ϕ ∈ P (g∗ ) ≃ S (g)
to left-invariant functions on T ∗ G which are polynomial on the fiber. The Casimir elements
g
H ∈ S (g) give rise to bi-invariant functions; thus the corresponding Hamiltonian systems
admit reduction with respect to any subgroup S ⊂ G × G .
Lemma 2.7 Let S ⊂ G × G be a Lie subgroup, s ⊂ g ⊕ g its Lie subalgebra, p : g∗ ⊕ g∗ → s∗
the canonical projection, S × T ∗ G → T ∗ G the restriction to H of the action (2.12) . This action
is Hamiltonian and the corresponding moment map is µS = p ◦ µ.
Now let us assume again that (g, r) is a Lie algebra equipped with a classical r-matrix
r ∈ End g satisfying (2.8) . Combining the Lie algebra homomorphisms r± : gr → g we get an
embedding ir : gr → g ⊕ g; we may identify the Lie group which corresponds to gr with the
subgroup Gr ⊂ G × G which corresponds to the Lie subalgebra gr ⊂ g ⊕ g. Fix F ∈ g∗r and let
OF ⊂ g∗r be its coadjoint orbit. We want to apply to OF the ‘symplectic induction’ procedure.
Since half of Gr is acting by left translations and the other half by right translations, the action
of G on the reduced space will be destroyed. However, the Casimir elements survive reduction.
Theorem 2.8 (i) The reduced symplectic manifold T ∗ G × OF //Gr is canonically isomorphic
g
to OF . (ii) Extend Casimir elements H ∈ S (g) ≃ P (g∗ ) to G × G -invariant functions on
∗
T G; these functions admit reduction with respect to Gr ; the reduced Hamiltonians coincide
with those described in theorem 2.3, namely, Hred = ir (H) |OF ; the quotient Hamiltonian flow
g
on OF which corresponds to H ∈ S (g) is described by the Lax equation.
Theorem 2.8 allows to get explicit formulae for the solutions of Lax equations in terms
of the factorization problem in G. In these lectures we are mainly interested in its role for
quantization.
The construction of Lax equations based on theorem 2.3 may be applied to finite-dimensional
semisimple Lie algebras (Kostant (1979)). However, its really important applications are connected with loop algebras, which possess sufficiently many Casimirs. We shall describe two

Quantum and Classical Integrable Systems

13

examples both of which have interesting quantum counterparts: the open Toda lattice (this is
the example first treated in (Kostant (1979))) and the so-called generalized Gaudin model (its
quantum counterpart was originally proposed in (Gaudin (1983))).
2.2

Two Examples

2.2.1. Generalized Toda Lattice. The Toda Hamiltonian describes transverse oscillations of
a 1-dimensional cyclic molecule with the nearest-neighbour interaction around the equilibrium
configuration. Thus the phase space is M = R2n with the canonical Poisson bracket; the
Hamiltonian is
n−1
n
1X 2 X
exp (qi − qi+1 ) + exp (qn − q1 ) .
pi +
H=
2 i=1
i=1

Removing the last term in the potential energy gives the open Toda lattice whose behaviour is
qualitatively different (all potentials are repulsive, and the Hamiltonian describes the scattering
of particles in the conical valley
C+ = {q = (q1 , ..., qn ) ∈ Rn ; qi − qi+1 ≤ 0, i = 1, ..., n − 1}

with steep walls). The generalized open Toda lattice may be associated to an arbitrary semisimple Lie algebra. (Generalized periodic Toda lattices correspond to affine Lie algebras.) I
shall briefly recall the corresponding construction (cf. Kostant (1979), Goodman and Wallach
(1982), Reyman and Semenov-Tian-Shansky (1994)).
Let g be a real split semisimple Lie algebra, σ : g → g a Cartan involution, g = k ⊕ p
the corresponding Cartan decomposition (i.e., σ = id on k, σ = −id on p). Fix a split Cartan
subalgebra a ⊂ p ; let ∆ ⊂ a∗ be the root system of (g, a) . For α ∈ ∆ let
gα = {X ∈ g; adH · X = α (H) X, H ∈ a}

(2.14)

be the corresponding root space. Fix an order in the system of roots and let ∆+ ⊂ ∆ be the
set of positive roots, P ⊂ ∆+ the corresponding set of simple roots. Put n = ⊕α∈∆+ gα . Let
b = a + n ; recall that b is a maximal solvable subalgebra in g (Borel subalgebra). We have
g = k+̇a+̇n

(2.15)

(the Iwasawa decomposition). Equip g with the standard inner product (the Killing form).
Clearly, we have k⊥ = p, b⊥ = n; thus the dual of b is modelled on p, and we may regard p as a
b -module with respect to the coadjoint representation. Let G be a connected split semisimple
Lie group with finite center which corresponds to g, G = AN K its Iwasawa decomposition
which corresponds to the decomposition (2.15) of its Lie algebra.
Remark 2.2 The Iwasawa decomposition usually does not give rise to a Lie bialgebra structure on g; indeed, the subalgebras k and b are not isotropic (unless g is a complex Lie algebra
considered as an algebra over R). In other words, the classical r-matrix associated with the decomposition (2.15) is not skew. We shall briefly recall the construction of the so-called standard
skew-symmetric classical r-matrix on a semisimple Lie algebra in Section 2.2.3 below.

14

M.A. Semenov-Tian-Shansky

(1)
The Borel subalgebra admits ah decreasing
⊃ b(2) ⊃ ..., where b(1) =
i filtration b ⊃ b
[b, b] = n, b(2) = [n, n] , ..., b(k) = n, b(k−1) . By duality, there is an increasing filtration of
p ≃ b∗ by ad∗ b -invariant subspaces. To describe it let us introduce some notation. For α ∈ ∆
let
X
α=
mi αi
(2.16)
αi ∈P

be its decomposition with respect to the simple roots; put d (α) =
dp =

M

gα , p 6= 0, d0 = a, n(k) =

P

M

αi ∈P mi . Put

dp .

(2.17)

p≥k

{α∈∆;d(α)=p}

Define the mapping s : g → p : X 7−→ 21 (id − σ) X, and let pk = ⊕0≤p≤k s (dp ) , k = 0, 1, ...
It is easy to see that a = p0 ⊂ p1 ⊂ ... are invariant with respect to the coadjoint action
of b; moreover, pk is the annihilator of b(k+1) in p. Thus pk is set in duality with b/b(k+1) .
Put s = b/b(2) and let L ∈ p1 ⊗ s ⊂ p1 ⊗ S (s) be the corresponding canonical element. Let Is
g
be the specialization to s of the subalgebra I = S (g) of Casimir elements. An example of a
Hamiltonian H ∈ Is is constructed from the Killing form:
H=

1
(L, L) ,
2

(2.18)

in obvious notation. To describe all others we may use the following trick. Fix a faithful representation (ρ, V ) of g and put LV = (ρ ⊗ id) L. (ρ, V ) is usually called the auxiliary linear
representation.
Proposition 2.9 (i) Is is generated by Hk = trV LkV ∈ S (s) , k = 1, 2, ... (ii) L defines a Lax
representation for any Hamiltonian equation on S (s) with the Hamiltonian H ∈ Is .
We have s = a⋉u, where u = n/ [n, n] ; the corresponding Lie group is S = A⋉U, U = N/N ′ .
Choose eα ∈ gα , α ∈ P, in such a way that (eα , e−α ) = 1, and put
(
)
X
OT = p +
bα (eα + e−α ) ; p ∈ a, bα > 0 ;
(2.19)
α∈P

by construction, OT ⊂ p1 . It is convenient to introduce the parametrization bα = exp α (q) ,
q ∈ a.
Proposition 2.10 (i) OT is an open coadjoint orbit of S in p1 ≃ s∗ (ii) Restriction to OT of
the Hamiltonian (2.18) is the generalized Toda Hamiltonian
HT =

X
1
(p, p) +
exp 2α (q) .
2
α∈P

Quantum and Classical Integrable Systems

15

The Toda orbit has the natural structure of a polarized symplectic manifold, that is, OT
admits an S-invariant fibering whose fibers are Lagrangian submanifolds; the description of
this Lagrangian structure is a standard
part of the geometric quantization program (Kirillov
P
(1976)). More precisely, put f = α∈P (eα + e−α ); let us choose f as a marked point on OT .
Proposition 2.11 (i) We have S/U ≃ A; the isomorphism OT = S · f induces a Lagrangian
fibering OT → A with fiber U. (ii) OT is isomorphic to T ∗ A as a polarized symplectic manifold.
(iii) The Lagrangian subalgebra lf ⊂ s subordinate to f is lf = u.

Remark 2.3 We may of course regard OT as a coadjoint orbit of the group B = AN itself;
indeed, there is an obvious projection B → S and its kernel lies in the stabilizer of f. The ’big’
Lagrangian subgroup L̂f ⊂ B subordinate to f coincides with N.
An alternative description of the open Toda lattice which provides more detailed information
on its behavior and survives quantization is based on Hamiltonian reduction. The following
result is a version of theorem 2.8. Let us consider again the Hamiltonian action of G × G
on T ∗ G. To get the generalized Toda lattice we shall restrict this action to the subgroup
Gr = K × B ⊂ G × G. We may regard OT as a Gr -orbit, the action of K being trivial.
Theorem 2.12 (i) T ∗ G × OT // Gr is isomorphic to OT as a symplectic manifold. (ii) Let H2
be the quadratic Casimir element which corresponds to the Killing form on g. The Toda flow is
the reduction of the Hamiltonian flow on T ∗ G generated by H2 .
Theorem 2.12 leads to explicit formulae for the trajectories of the Toda lattice in terms
of the Iwasawa decomposition of matrices (Olshanetsky and Perelomov (1994), Goodman and
Wallach (1982), Reyman and Semenov-Tian-Shansky (1994)).
Since OT admits a real polarization, we may state the following version of proposition 2.6.
Observe that if we regard OT as a Gr -orbit, the Lagrangian subgroup subordinate to f ∈ OT
is K × N.
Theorem 2.13 (i) T ∗ G× {f } //K × N is isomorphic to OT as a symplectic manifold. (ii)
The standard Lagrangian polarization on T ∗ G by the fibers of projection T ∗ G → G gives rise
to the Lagrangian polarization on OT described in proposition 2.11.
It is easy to see that the Toda flow is again reproduced as the reduction of the Hamiltonian
flow on T ∗ G generated by the quadratic Hamiltonian H2 .
As discussed in Section 4.1.2, theorem 2.13 gives a very simple hint to the solution of the
quantization problem.
2.2.2. More examples: standard r-matrices on semisimple Lie algebras and on loop
algebras. As already noted, the classical r-matrix associated with the Iwasawa decomposition
of a simple Lie algebra g is not skew and hence does not give rise to a Lie bialgebra structure on
g. While this is not a disadvantage for the study of the Toda lattice, the bialgebra structure is

16

M.A. Semenov-Tian-Shansky

of course basic in the study of the q-deformed case. Let us briefly recall the so-called standard
Lie bialgebra structure on g. We shall explicitly describe the corresponding Manin triple.
Let g be a complex simple Lie algebra, a ⊂ g its Cartan subalgebra, ∆ ⊂ a∗ the root system
of (g, a) , b+ = a + n+ a positive Borel subalgebra which corresponds to some choice of order in
∆, b− the opposite Borel subalgebra. For α ∈ ∆ let eα be the corresponding root space vector
normalized in such a way that (eα , e−α ) = 1. We may identify a with the quotient algebra
b± /n± ; let π± : b± → a be the corresponding canonical projection. Put d = g ⊕ g (direct sum
of two copies); we equip d with the inner product which is the difference of the Killing forms
on the first and the second copy. Let gδ ⊂ d be the diagonal subalgebra,
g∗ = {(X+ , X− ) ∈ b+ ⊕ b− ; π+ (X+ ) = −π− (X− )} .
(Mind the important minus sign in this definition!)

Proposition 2.14 (i) d, gδ , g∗ is a Manin triple. (ii) The corresponding Lie bialgebra structure on g is associated with the classical r-matrix
X
r=
eα ∧ e−α .
(2.20)
α∈∆+

(iii) The Lie bialgebra gδ , g


∗

is factorizable.

The construction described above admits a straightforward generalization for loop algebras.
The associated r-matrix is called trigonometric. For future reference we shall recall its definition
as well.


Let g be a complex semisimple Lie algebra, let Lg = g ⊗ C z, z −1 be the loop algebra of
g consisting of rational functions with values in g which are regular on CP (1) r {0, ∞} . Let
Lg0 , Lg∞ be its local completions at 0 and ∞; by definition, Lg0 , Lg∞ consist of formal Laurent
series in local parameters z, z −1 , respectively. Put b
d = Lg0 ⊕ Lg∞ (direct sum of Lie algebras).
Clearly, the diagonal embedding Lg ֒→ b
d : X 7−→ (X, X) is a homomorphism of Lie algebras.
Let


Lg± = g ⊗ C[ z ±1 ],
b
b+ = {X ∈ Lg+ ; X (0) ∈ b+ } ,
b
b− = {X ∈ Lg− ; X (∞) ∈ b− }
(where X (0) , X (∞) denote the constant term of the formal series). Combining the ’evaluation
at 0’ (respectively, at ∞) with the projections π± : b± → a we get two canonical projection
maps π
b± : b
b± → a. Put
n
o
∗
(Lg) = (X+ , X− ) ∈ b
b+ ⊕ b
b− ; π
b+ (X+ ) = −b
π− (X− ) ⊂ b
d.
∗

Let us set (Lg) and Lg in duality by means of the bilinear form on b
d

h(X+ , X− ) , (Y+ , Y− )i =
Resz=0 (X+ (z), Y+ (z)) dz/z + Resz=∞ (X− (z), Y− (z)) dz/z.

(2.21)

Quantum and Classical Integrable Systems
∗
Proposition 2.15 b
d, Lg, (Lg) is a Manin triple.

17

∗

Remark 2.4 Properly
speaking, with our choice of a completion for (Lg) the Lie

bialgebra Lg, (Lg)∗ is not factorizable; indeed, our definition requires that the Lie algebra
and its dual should be isomorphic as linear spaces. However, a slightly weaker assertion
∗
◦
still holds true: the dual Lie algebra (Lg) contains an open dense subalgebra (Lg) =

∗
◦
(X+ , X− ) ∈ (Lg) ; X± ∈ Lg such that the mappings (Lg) → Lg : (X+ , X− ) 7−→ X± are
◦
Lie algebra homomorphisms and (Lg) is isomorphic to Lg as a linear space. This subtlety is
quite typical of infinite-dimensional Lie algebras.
Let us finally say a few words on the trigonometric r-matrix itself. Define the cobracket
δ : Lg →Lg ⊗ Lg by
E
D
hδX, Y ⊗ Zi = X, [Y, Z]Lg∗ , X ∈ Lg, Y, Z ∈ (Lg)∗ ,

(2.22)

i.e. as the dual of the Lie bracket in (Lg)∗ with respect to the pairing (2.21). The element
δ(X) ∈ Lg ⊗ Lg may be regarded as a Laurent polynomial in two variables with values in g;
the cobracket (2.22) is then given by
z
h
i
δ(X) (z, w) = rtrig
, X1 (z) + X2 (w) ,
w
where rtrig (z/w) is a rational function in z/w with values in g ⊗ g. (We use the dummy indices
1, 2, ... to denote different copies of linear spaces; in other words,
X1 (z) := X (z) ⊗ 1, X2 (w) := 1 ⊗ X (w) ;
below we shall frequently use this abridged tensor notation.) The explicit expression for rtrig
is given by
rtrig (x) = t ·

x+1
+ r,
x−1

(2.23)

where t ∈ g ⊗ g is the canonical element (tensor Casimir) which represents the inner product
h, i in g and r ∈ g ∧ g is the standard classical r-matrix in g given by (2.20).
Remark 2.5 Note that the expression for rtrig which may be found in Belavin and Drinfeld
(1983) is different from (2.23), since these authors use a different grading in the loop algebra
(the so-called principal grading, as compared to the standard grading which we use in these
lectures.)

18

M.A. Semenov-Tian-Shansky

2.2.3. Generalized Gaudin Model. We shall return to the bialgebras described in the
previous section when we shall discuss the q-deformed algebras and the quadratic Poisson Lie
groups. In order to deal with our next example of an integrable system we shall use another
important Lie bialgebra associated with the Lie algebra of rational functions. The example to
be discussed is a model of spin-spin interaction (the so-called Gaudin model) which may be
deduced as a limiting case of lattice spin models (such as the Heisenberg XXX model) for small
values of the coupling constant (Gaudin (1983)). The original Gaudin model is related to the
sl (2) or su (2) algebras; below we shall discuss its generalization to arbitrary simple Lie algebras.
The generalized Gaudin Hamiltonians also arise naturally in the semiclassical approximation to
the Knizhnik-Zamolodchikov equations (Reshetikhin and Varchenko (1993)). The underlying
r-matrix associated with the Gaudin model is the so called rational r-matrix which is described
below.
Let g be a complex simple Lie algebra. Fix a finite set D = {z1 , ..., zN } ⊂ C ⊂ CP1
and let g(D) be the algebra of rational functions on CP1 with values in g which vanish at
infinity and are regular outside D. Let gzi = g ⊗ C((z − zi )) be the localization of g(D) at
zi ∈ D. [As usual, we denote by C((z)) the algebra of formal Laurent series in z, and by
C [[z]] its subalgebra consisting of formal Taylor series.] Put gD = ⊕zi ∈D gzi . There is a natural
embedding g(D) ֒→ gD which assigns to a rational function the set of its Laurent expansions
+
at each point zi ∈ D. Put g+
zi = g ⊗ C [[z − zi ]] , gD = ⊕zi ∈D gzi . Then
gD = g+
D +̇ g(D)

(2.24)

as a linear space. [This assertion has a very simple meaning. Fix an element X = (Xi )zi ∈D ∈ gD ;
truncating the formal series Xi , we get a finite set of Laurent polynomials which may be
regarded as principal parts of a rational function. Let X 0 be the rational function defined by
these principal parts; it is unique up to a normalization constant which may be fixed by a
condition at infinity. Expand X 0 in its Laurent series at z = zi ; by construction, Xi − Xi0 ∈ g+
zi
; thus P : X 7−→ X0 is a projection operator from gD onto g(D) parallel to g+
D . In other words,
the direct sum decomposition (2.24) is equivalent to the existence of a rational function with
prescribed principal parts; this is the assertion of the well known Mittag-Leffler theorem in
complex analysis. ]
Fix an inner product on g and extend it to gD by setting
X
hX, Y i =
Res (Xi , Yi ) dz, X = (Xi )zi ∈D , Y = (Yi )zi ∈D .
(2.25)
zi ∈D

(One may notice that the key difference from the formula (2.21) in the previous section is in
the choice of the differential dz instead of dz/z.) Both subspaces g(D), g+
D are isotropic
 with
respect to the inner product (2.25) which sets them into duality. Thus gD , g+
,
g(D)
is a
D
+
Manin triple. The linear space g(D) may be regarded as a gD −module with respect to the
N
coadjoint representation. The action of g+
D preserves the natural Z -filtration of g(D) by the
order of poles. In particular, rational functions with simple poles form an invariant subspace
⊂ g+
g(D)1 ⊂ g(D). Let g++
zi be the subalgebra consisting of formal series without constant
zi
++
+
++
terms. Put gD = ⊕zi ∈D g++
zi ; clearly, gD is an ideal in gD and its action in g(D)1 is trivial.

Quantum and Classical Integrable Systems

19

++
N
The quotient algebra g+
= ⊕zi ∈D g. The inner product (2.25) sets the
D /gD is isomorphic to g
N
linear spaces g(D)1 and g in duality. Let L(z) ∈ g(D)1 ⊗ gN be the canonical element; we shall
regard L(z) as a matrix-valued rational function with coefficients in gN ⊂ S(gN ). Fix a faithful
linear representation (ρ, V ) of g (the auxiliary linear representation); it extends canonically to
a representation (ρ, V (z)) of the Lie algebra g(z) = g ⊗ C(z) in the space V (z) = V ⊗ C(z). (In
section 2.2.1 we have already used this auxiliary linear representation for a similar purpose, cf.
proposition 2.9 .) Put
LV (z) = (ρ ⊗ id)L(z).
(2.26)

The matrix coefficients of LV (z) generate the algebra of observables S(gN ). The Poisson bracket
relations in this algebra have a nice expression in ’tensor form’, the brackets of the matrix
coefficients of LV forming a matrix in EndV ⊗ EndV with coefficients in C(u, v) ⊗ S(gN );
the corresponding formula, suggested for the first time by Sklyanin (1979), was the starting
point of the whole theory of classical r-matrices. To describe it let us first introduce the rational
r-matrix,
tV
rV (u, v) =
,
(2.27)
u−v
P
Here t is the tensor Casimir of g which corresponds to the inner product in g (i.e., t = ea ⊗ea ,
where {ea } is an orthonormal basis in g) and tV = ρV ⊗ρV (t) . Notice that rV (u, v) is essentially
the Cauchy kernel solving the Mittag-Leffler problem on CP1 with which we started.
Proposition 2.16 The matrix coefficients of LV (u) satisfy the Poisson bracket relations
{LV (u) ⊗, LV (v)} = [rV (u, v), LV (u) ⊗ 1 + 1 ⊗ LV (v)] .

(2.28)

We shall now specialize corollary 2.4 to the present setting; it shows that in some way
spectral invariants of the Lax operator L(z) may be regarded as ’radial parts’ of the Casimir
elements.
Remark 2.6 One should use some caution, as Casimir elements do not lie in the symmetric
algebra S(gD ) itself but rather in its appropriate local completion; however, their projections to
S(gN ) are well defined. More precisely, for each zi ∈ D consider the projective limit
←−

S̃ (gzi ) = lim S (gzi ) /S (gzi ) (g ⊗ zin C [[zi ]])
n→+∞

and put S̃(gD ) = ⊗i S̃ (gzi ) . Passing to the dual language let us observe that the inner product
on gD induces the evaluation map g(D) × S(gD ) → C ; the completion is chosen in such a way
that this map makes sense for S̃(gD ). To relate Casimir elements lying in S̃(gD ) to the more
conventional spectral invariants, let us notice that if L(z) ∈ g(D) is a ’Lax matrix’, its spectral
invariants, e.g., the coefficients of its characteristic polynomial
X
P (z, λ) = det (L (z) − λ) =
σk (z) λk ,
(2.29)
are rational functions in z. To get numerical invariants we may expand σk (z) in a local parameter (at any point ζ ∈ CP1 ) and take any coefficient of this expansion. The resulting functionals

20

M.A. Semenov-Tian-Shansky

are well defined as polynomial mappings from g(D) into C . It is easy to see that any such
functional is obtained by applying the evaluation map to an appropriate Casimir element ζ ∈
S̃(gD )gD .
Clearly, we have gD = g(D) +̇ gN +̇ g++
D , and hence
S(gD ) = S(gN ) ⊕ (g(D) S(gD ) + S(gD ) g++
D ).
Let γ : S(gD ) → S(gN ) be the projection map associated with this decomposition.
e D )gD of Casimir elements is a
Proposition 2.17 The restriction of γ to the subalgebra S(g
morphism of Poisson algebras; under the natural pairing S(gN ) × g(D)1 → C induced by the
inner product (2.25) the restricted Casimirs coincide with the spectral invariants of L(z).
The mapping γ is an analogue of the Harish-Chandra homomorphism (Dixmier (1974)); its
definition may be extended to the quantum case as well.
Corollary 2.18 Spectral invariants of L(z) are in involution with respect to the standard LiePoisson bracket on gN ; L(z) defines a Lax representation for any of these invariants (regarded
as a Hamiltonian on (gN )∗ ≃ gN .)
The generalized Gaudin Hamiltonians are, by definition, the quadratic Hamiltonians contained in this family; one may take, e.g.,
HV (u) =

1
trV L(u)2 .
2

(2.30)

(Physically, they describe, e.g., the bilinear interaction of several ’magnetic momenta’.)
Corollary 2.18 does not mention the ’global’ Lie algebra gD (and may in fact be proved
by elementary means). However, of the three Lie algebras involved, it is probably the most
important one, as it is responsible for the dynamics of the system. It is this ’global’ Lie algebra
that may be called the hidden symmetry algebra.
Setting P (z, λ) = 0 in (2.29), we get an affine algebraic curve (more precisely, a family of
curves parametrized by the values of commuting Hamiltonians); this switches on the powerful
algebraic-geometric machinery and makes the complete integrability of the generalized Gaudin
Hamiltonians almost immediate (Reyman and Semenov-Tian-Shansky (1994)).
Remark 2.7 In the exposition above we kept the divisor D fixed. A more invariant way is of
course to use adèlic language. Thus one may replace the algebra gD with the global algebra gA
defined over the ring A of adèles of C(z); fixing a divisor amounts to fixing a Poisson subspace
inside the Lie algebra g(z) of rational functions (which is canonically identified with the dual
space of the subalgebra g+
A ). The use of adèlic freedom allowing us to add new points to the
divisor is essential in the treatment of the quantum Gaudin model.

Quantum and Classical Integrable Systems

21

Remark 2.8 Further generalizations consist in replacing the rational r-matrix with more complicated ones. One is of course tempted to repeat the construction above, replacing CP1 with
an arbitrary algebraic curve. There are obvious obstructions which come from the MittagLeffler theorem for curves: the subalgebra g(C) of rational functions on the curve C does
not admit a complement in gA which is again a Lie subalgebra; for elliptic curves (and g =
sl(n)) this problem may be solved (Belavin and Drinfeld (1983), Reyman and Semenov-TianShansky (1994)) by considering quasiperiodic functions on C, and in this way we recover elliptic r-matrices (which were originally the first example of classical r-matrices ever considered
(Sklyanin (1979)))!

3

Quadratic Case

The integrable systems which we have considered so far are modelled on Poisson submanifolds
of linear spaces, namely on the dual spaces of appropriate Lie algebras equipped with the LiePoisson bracket. As we shall see, quantization of such systems (whenever possible) still leaves
us in the realm of ordinary (i.e., non-quantum) Lie groups and algebras. Let us note in passing
that, in the context of the Integrability phenomena, the name ‘Quantum Groups’ leads to some
confusion: one is tempted to believe that quantization of integrable systems implies that the
corresponding ‘hidden symmetry groups’ also become quantum. As a matter of fact, the real
reason to introduce Quantum groups is different. (This is clear from the fact that the Planck
constant and the deformation parameter q which enters the definition of Quantum groups
are independent of each other!) The point is that we are usually interested not in individual
integrable systems, but rather in families of such systems with an arbitrary number of ’particles’.
(This is particularly natural for problems arising in Quantum Statistical Mechanics.) A good
approximation is obtained if one assumes that the phase space of a multiparticle system is
the direct product of phase spaces for single particles. However, the definition of observables
for multiparticle systems is not straightforward and tacitly assumes the existence of a Hopf
structure (or some of its substitutes) on the algebra A of observables, i.e. of a map ∆(N ) : A →
⊗N A which embeds the algebra of observables of a single particle into that of the multiparticle
system and thus allows us to speak of individual particles inside the complex system. For
systems which are modelled on dual spaces of Lie algebras the underlying Hopf structure is
that of S (g) or U (g) which is derived from the additive structure on g∗ (cf. section 2). There is
an important class of integrable systems (difference Lax equations) for which the natural Hopf
structure is different; it is derived from the multiplicative structure in a nonabelian Lie group.
Let me briefly recall the corresponding construction.
As already mentioned, difference Lax equations arise when the ’auxiliary linear problem’
which underlies the construction is associated with a difference equation. A typical example is
a first order difference system,
ψn+1 = Ln ψn , n ∈ Z.
(3.1)
The discrete variable n ∈ Z labels the points of an infinite 1-dimensional lattice; if we impose the periodic boundary condition Ln = Ln+N , it is replaced with a finite periodic lattice

22

M.A. Semenov-Tian-Shansky

parametrized by Z/N Z. It is natural to assume that the Lax matrices Ln belong to a matrix
Lie group G. Difference Lax equations arise as compatibility conditions for the linear system,
ψn+1 = Ln ψn ,
∂t ψn = An ψn ,

(3.2)

with an appropriately chosen An . They have the form of finite-difference zero-curvature equations,
∂t Ln = Ln An+1 − An Ln .
(3.3)
Let Ψ be the fundamental solution of the difference system (3.1) normalized by Ψ0 = I. The
value of Ψ at n = N is called the monodromy matrix for the periodic problem and is denoted
by ML . Clearly,
Q
←
−
Ψn = 0≤k<n Lk ,
Q
←
−
ML = 0≤k<N Lk .

Spectral invariants of the difference operator associated with the periodic difference system
(3.1) are the eigenvalues of the monodromy matrix. Thus one expects
Is = trMLs , s = 1, 2, ...,
to be the integrals of motion for any Lax equation associated with the linear problem (3.1).
This will hold if the monodromy matrix itself evolves isospectrally, i.e. ,
∂t ML = [ML , A(ML )]

(3.4)

for some matrix A(TL ). Let us now discuss possible choices of the Poisson structure on the
phase space which will turn (3.3) into Hamiltonian equations of motion. Observe first of all
QN
G; if we assume that the variables
that the phase space of our system is the product G =
corresponding to different copies of G are independent of each other, we may equip G with
the product Poisson structure. The monodromy may be regarded as a mapping M : G → G
Q
←
−
which assigns to a sequence (L0 , ..., LN −1 ) the ordered product ML = Lk . Let Ft : G → G
be the (local) dynamical flow associated with equation (3.3) and Ft : G → G the corresponding
flow associated with equation (3.4) for the monodromy. We expect the following diagram to be
commutative:
F
G →t G
|
|
.
M
↓
↓ M
F

G →t G
In other words, the dynamics in G factorizes over G. It is natural to demand that all maps in
this diagram should be Poissonian; in particular,
monodromy map M : G → G should be
Qthe
N
compatible with the product structure on G =
G. By induction, this property is reduced
to the following one:
Multiplication m : G × G → G is a Poisson mapping.

Quantum and Classical Integrable Systems

23

This is precisely the axiom introduced by Drinfeld (1983) as a definition of Poisson Lie
groups. In brief, one can say that the multiplicativity property of the Poisson bracket on G
matches perfectly with the kinematics of one-dimensional lattice systems.
3.1

. Abstract Case: Poisson Lie Groups and Factorizable Lie Bialgebras

To construct lattice Lax system one may start with an arbitrary Manin triple, or, still more
generally, with a factorizable Lie bialgebra. Let us briefly describe this construction which is
parallel to the linear case but involves the geometry of Poisson Lie groups. Although main applications are connected with infinite-dimensional groups (e.g., loop groups) it is more instructive
to start with the finite-dimensional case.
Let (g, g∗ ) be a finite-dimensional factorizable Lie bialgebra. Recall that in this case r± =
1
(r
± id) are Lie algebra homomorphisms from g∗ ≃ gr into g. Let G, G∗ be the connected
2
simply connected Lie groups which correspond to g, g∗ , respectively. Let us assume that G
is a linear group; let (ρ, V ) be its faithful linear representation. We extend r± to Lie group
homomorphisms from G∗ into G which we denote by the same letters; we shall also write
h± = r± (h) , h ∈ G∗ . Both G and G∗ carry a natural Poisson structure which makes them
Poisson Lie groups. The description of the Poisson bracket on G is particularly simple. For
ϕ ∈ F (G) let Dϕ, D′ ϕ ∈ g∗ be its left and right differentials defined by
d
ϕ (exp tX · L) |t=0 ,
dt
d
hD′ ϕ (L) , Xi = ϕ (L exp tX) |t=0 , L ∈ G, X ∈ g.
dt

hDϕ (L) , Xi =

(3.5)

The Sklyanin bracket on G is defined by
{ϕ, ψ} = hr, D′ ϕ ∧ D′ ψi − hr, Dϕ ∧ Dψi .

(3.6)

An equivalent description which makes sense when G is a linear group: For L ∈ G put LV =
ρV (L) ; the matrix coefficients of LV generate the affine ring F [G] of G. It is convenient
not to fix a representation (ρV , V ) but to consider all finite-dimensional representations of
G simultaneously. The reason is that the Hamiltonians which are used to produce integrable
systems are spectral invariants of the Lax matrix. To get a complete set of invariants one may
consider either trV LnV for a fixed representation and all n ≥ 1 or, alternatively, trV LV for all
linear representations. The second version is more convenient in the quantum case. If (ρW , W )
is another linear representation, we get from the definition (3.6) :


(3.7)
LV ⊗ LW = [rV W , LV ⊗ LW ] , where rV W = (ρV ⊗ ρW ) (r) .
,

To avoid excessive use of tensor product signs one usually puts
L1V = LV ⊗ I, L2W = I ⊗ LW ;

24

M.A. Semenov-Tian-Shansky

formula (3.7) is then condensed to
 1 2
LV , LW



= rV W , L1V L2W .

(3.8)

Let I ⊂ F [G] be the subalgebra generated by trV LV , V ∈ Rep G. Formula (3.8) immediately
implies the following assertion.
Proposition 3.1 I ⊂ F [G] is a commutative subalgebra with respect to the Poisson bracket
(3.6) .
The dual Poisson bracket on G∗ may be described in similar terms. Extend r± to Lie group
homomorphisms r± : G∗ → G; it is easy to see that ir : G∗ → G × G : T 7−→ (r+ (T ) , r− (T ))
is an injection; hence G∗ may be identified with a subgroup in G × G. We shall write r± (T ) =
T± for short. Let again (ρV , V ) , (ρW , W ) be two linear representation of G; put TV± = ρV ◦
±
T± , TW
= ρW ◦ T± T ∈ G∗ . Matrix coefficients of TV± , ρV ∈ RepG, generate the affine ring
∗
F [G ] of G∗ .
±
The Poisson bracket relations for the matrix coefficients of TV± , TW
are given by
 ±1 ±2


±2
TV , TW = rV W , TV±1 TW
,
(3.9)
 +1 −2


+1 −2
TV , TW = rV W + tV W , TV TW ;

here t ∈ g ⊗ g is the tensor Casimir which corresponds to the inner product on g and tV W =
ρV ⊗ ρW (t) .
Consider the action
G∗ × G → G : (h, x) 7−→ h+ xh−1
(3.10)
− .

Lemma 3.2 G∗ acts locally freely on an open cell in G containing unit element.
In other words, almost all elements x ∈ G admit a decomposition x = h+ h−1
− , where
h± = r± (h) for some h ∈ G∗ . (Moreover, this decomposition is unique if both h and (h+ , h− )
are sufficiently close to the unit element.) This explains the term ’factorizable group’.
Lemma 3.2 allows us to push forward the Poisson bracket from G∗ to G. More precisely, we
have the following result.
Proposition 3.3 There exists a unique Poisson structure {, }∗ on G such that
F : G∗ → G : (x+ , x− ) 7−→ x+ x−1
−
is a Poisson mapping; it is given by
{ϕ, ψ}∗ = hr, Dϕ ∧ Dψi + hr, D′ ϕ ∧ D′ ψi
− h2r+ , Dϕ ∧ D′ ψi − h2r− , D′ ϕ ∧ Dψi , ϕ, ψ ∈ C ∞ (G) .
∗

(3.11)

Equivalent description of the bracket {, } for linear groups: let again LV = ρV (L) , LW =
ρW (L) ; then
 1 2 ∗
LV , LW =
(3.12)
rV W L1V L2W + L1V L2W rV W
−L1V rV W L2W − L2W rV W L1V − L1V tV W L2W + L2W tV W L1V .

Quantum and Classical Integrable Systems

25

∗

Remark 3.1 (i) A priori the bracket {, } is defined only on the big cell in G (i.e., on the
image of G∗ ); however, formulae (3.11,3.12) show that it extends smoothly to the whole G. (ii)
One may notice that the choice of F is actually rigid: this is essentially the only combination of
x+ , x− such that the bracket for x = F (x+ , x− ) is expressed in terms of x (not of its factors).
Recall that I ⊂ F [G] consists of spectral invariants; thus we are again in the setting of the
generalized Kostant-Adler theorem: there are two Poisson structures on the same underlying
space and the Casimirs of the former are in involution with respect to the latter.
Theorem 3.4 Hamiltonians H ∈ I generate Lax equations on G with respect to the Sklyanin
bracket .
Geometrically, this means that the Hamiltonian flow generated by H ∈ I preserves two
∗
systems of symplectic leaves in G, namely, the symplectic leaves of {, } and {, } . The latter
coincide with the conjugacy classes in G (for a proof see jjciteCIMPA). In order to include
lattice Lax equations into our general framework we have to introduce the notion of twisting
which is discussed in the next section.
Remark 3.2 The Hamiltonian reduction picture discussed in section 2.1.1 may be fully generalized to the present case as well (Semenov-Tian-Shansky (1994b)). To define the symplectic
induction functor we now need the nonabelian moment map (see Reyman (1996) for a review).
In the present exposition we shall not describe this construction.
3.2

Duality theory for Poisson Lie groups and twisted spectral invariants

Our key observation so far has been the duality between the Hamiltonians of integrable systems
on a Lie group and the Casimir functions of its Poisson dual. In section 4.2 we shall see that a
similar relation holds for quantized universal enveloping algebras. In order to keep the parallel
between the two cases as close as possible we must introduce into the picture still another
ingredient: the twisted Poisson structure on the dual group. This notion will also allow us
to include lattice Lax equations into our general framework. Roughly speaking, twisting is
possible whenever there is an automorphism τ ∈ Autg which preserves the r-matrix (i.e., τ ⊗
τ · r = r). Outer automorphisms are particularly interesting. However, even in the case of inner
automorphisms the situation does not become completely trivial. The natural explanation of
twisting requires the full duality theory which involves the notions of the double, the Heisenberg
double and the twisted double of a Poisson Lie group (Semenov-Tian-Shansky (1994c)). In the
present exposition we shall content ourselves by presenting the final formulae for the twisted
Poisson brackets. The structure of these formulae is fairly uniform; we list them starting with
the case of finite-dimensional simple Lie algebras (where all automorphisms are inner) and then
pass to the lattice case (which accounts for the treatment of Lax equations on the lattice) and
to the case of affine Lie algebras. In the quantum case which will be considered in the next
section twisting will play an important role in the description of quantum Casimirs.

26

M.A. Semenov-Tian-Shansky

3.2.1. Finite dimensional simple Lie groups. We begin with a finite dimensional example
and return to the setting of section 2.2.2. Let again g be a complex simple Lie algebra, b+ =
a + n+ its Borel subalgebra, b− the opposite Borel subalgebra, and π± : b± → a the canonical
projection,
g∗ = {(X+ , X− ) ∈ b+ ⊕ b− ⊂ g ⊕ g; π+ (X+ ) = −π− (X− )} .
Let B± ⊂ G be the corresponding Borel subgroups, and π± : B± → A the canonical projections,
o
n
−1
.
(3.13)
G∗ = (x+ , x− ) ∈ B+ × B− ; π+ (x+ ) = π− (x− )

Define rd ∈

V2

(g ⊕ g) by

rd =



r −r − t
−r + t r



,

(3.14)

where t ∈ g ⊗ g is the tensor Casimir. (One may notice that rd equips g ⊕ g with the structure
of a Lie bialgebra which coincides, up to an isomorphism, with that of the Drinfeld double of
g.) Our next assertion specializes the results stated in the previous section. Let us define the
Poisson bracket on G∗ by the formula
{ϕ, ψ} = hhrd , D′ ϕ ∧ D′ ψii − hhrd , Dϕ ∧ Dψii ,
(3.15)

D ′ ϕ
D+ ϕ
where Dϕ = D
, D′ ϕ = D′+ ϕ are left and right differentials of ϕ with respect to its two
−ϕ
−
V
arguments and hh, ii is the natural coupling between 2 (g ⊕ g) and its dual.
Proposition 3.5 (i) G∗ is the dual Poisson Lie group of G which corresponds to the standard
r-matrix described in (2.20). (ii) The mapping G∗ → G : (x+ , x− ) 7−→ x+ x−1
− is a bijection
of G∗ onto the ’big Schubert cell’ in G. (iii) The dual Poisson bracket on G∗ extends smoothly
from the big cell to the whole of G; it is explicitly given by (3.11) and its Casimirs are central
functions on G.
The next definition prepares the introduction of twisting.
Definition 3.1 Let (g, gr ) be a factorizable Lie bialgebra with the classical r-matrix r ∈ g ⊗ g.
An automorphism of (g, gr ) is an automorphism ϕ ∈ Aut g which preserves the r-matrix and
the inner product on g.
We have the following simple result.
Proposition 3.6 Let g be a finite-dimensional simple Lie algebra with the standard classical
r-matrix. Then Aut (g, gr )coincides with the Cartan subgroup A ⊂ G.
The action of A on ∧2 g is the restriction to A ⊂ G of the wedge square of the standard
adjoint action.
Remark 3.3 If g is only semisimple, Aut (g, gr )may have a nontrivial group of components.

Quantum and Classical Integrable Systems

27

The Sklyanin bracket on G is invariant with respect to the action A × G → G by right
translations. By contrast, the dual bracket is not invariant, and in this way we get a family
of Poisson structures on G∗ with different Casimir functions. More precisely, define the action
A × G∗ → G∗ by

h : (x+ , x− ) 7−→ hx+ , h−1 x−
(3.16)
(Note that this action is compatible with (3.13); the flip h 7−→ h−1 is possible, since A
is abelian.) We denote by λh the contragredient action of h on F [G∗ ] : λh ϕ (x+ , x− ) =
ϕ h−1 x+ , hx− . Define the twisted Poisson bracket {, }∗h on G∗ by
∗

{ϕ, ψ}h = λ−1
h {λh ϕ, λh ψ} .

Explicitly we get
∗

{ϕ, ψ}h =

rdh D′ ϕ, D′ ψ

− hhrd Dϕ, Dψii ,

where
rdh =

2
^

Ad h ⊕ Ad h

−1



· rd =

r
(−r − t)h
−1
(−r + t) h
r

(3.17)
!

,

or, in matrix form,
 ±1 ±2 ∗ 

±2
TV , TW h = rV W , TV±1 TW
,
 +1 −2 ∗
+1 −2
−2
h
h
(rV W + tV W ),
TV , TW h = (rV W + tV W )TV TW − TV+1 TW

(3.18)

where rVh W = Ad h ⊗ Ad h−1 · rV W = Ad h2 ⊗ id · rV W and similarly for thV W .
Let us denote by Ih (G) the set of twisted spectral invariants; by definition, φ ∈ Ih (G) if
φ (gx) = φ (xgh) for any x, g ∈ G.
Example 3.1 Let (ρ, V ) be a linear representation of G; then φ : x 7−→ trV ρ(hx) is a twisted
spectral invariant.
Proposition 3.7 (i) There exists a unique Poisson structure on G such that the twisted factorization map Fh : G∗ → G : (x+ , x− ) 7−→ h2 x+ x− is a Poisson mapping. (ii) Fh transforms
the Casimir functions of {, }∗h into the set of twisted spectral invariants Ih2 (G) . (ii) Twisted
spectral invariants also commute with respect to the Sklyanin bracket on G and generate on G
generalized Lax equations
dL
= AL − LB, A = Ad h2 · B.
dt
.

28

M.A. Semenov-Tian-Shansky

It is instructive to write an explicit formula for the bracket on G which is the push-forward
∗
of {, }h with respect to the factorization map. We get
∗

{ϕ, ψ}h = hr, Dϕ ∧ Dψi +D hr, D′ ϕ ∧ D′ ψi E
−1

− rh , Dϕ ∧ D′ ψ − rh , D′ ϕ ∧ Dψ
D −1
E
− th , Dϕ ∧ D′ ψ + th , D′ ϕ ∧ Dψ , ϕ, ψ ∈ C ∞ (G) ,

(3.19)

where t is the tensor Casimir, and we put rh = Ad h ⊗ ·Ad h−1 · r and th = Ad h ⊗ Ad h−1j · t.
This bracket again extends smoothly to the whole of G (cf. (3.11). Equivalently,
 1 2 ∗
LV , LW h = rV W L1V L2V + L1V L2W rV W
−1

−L1V rVh W L2V − L2W rVh W L1V

(3.20)

−1

−L1V thV W L2W + L2W tVh W L1V .
∗

The twisted bracket {, }h on G∗ is not multiplicative with respect to the group structure on
G ; to explain its relation to the Poisson group theory we shall need some more work.
Let a ⋉ g∗ be the semidirect product of Lie algebras which corresponds to action (3.16); in
other words, we set
∗

[H, (X+ , X− )] = ([H, X+ ] , − [H, X− ]) , H ∈ a, X± ∈ b± .

Fix a basis {Hi } of a and let H i be the dual basis of a∗ . We define a (trivial) 2-cocycle
on g with values in a∗ by
X
(Hi , [X, Y ]) H i .
(3.21)
ω (X, Y ) =
i

∗

Let b
g = g ⊕ a be the central extension of g by a∗ which corresponds to this cocycle.

Proposition 3.8 (a ⋉ g∗ , b
g) is a Lie bialgebra.

The Poisson Lie group which corresponds to a ⋉ g∗ is the semidirect product A ⋉ G∗ associated with action (3.16). It is easy to see that the variable h ∈ A is central with respect to
this bracket; thus the bracket on A ⋉ G∗ splits into a family of brackets on G∗ parametrized by
∗
h ∈ A. This is precisely the family {, }h .
3.2.2.Twisting on the lattice. One may notice that the previous example is in fact trivial,
since the twisted bracket differs from the original one by a change of variables1. This is of course
closely related to the fact that the central extension associated with the cocycle (3.21) is also
trivial. Our next example is more interesting; it is adapted to the study of Lax equations on the
lattice. Put Γ = Z/N Z. Let again g be a finite dimensional simple Lie algebra equipped with a
standard r-matrix. Let g = gΓ be the Lie algebra of functions on Γ with values in g; obviously,
1

However, even in this case twisted spectral invariants give rise to a different set of Hamiltonians, as
compared with the non-twisted case.

Quantum and Classical Integrable Systems

29

V2
g inherits from g the natural Lie bialgebra structure; the corresponding r-matrix r ∈
g is
V2
given by rmn = δmn r, m, n ∈ Γ. We define rd ∈
(g ⊕ g) by


r −r − t
rd =
,
(3.22)
−r + t r
where t ∈ g ⊗ g is the tensor Casimir which corresponds to the standard inner product on g,
X
hhX, Y ii =
hXn , Yn i .
n

Let τ be the cyclic permutation on g, (τ X)n = Xn+1 mod N .
Lemma 3.9 τ ∈ Aut (g, g∗ ) .
Let us extend the action of τ to g ⊕ g in the following way:
τ · (X, Y ) = (τ X, Y ) .
(By analogy with (3.16), one might rotate the second copy of g in the opposite sense, but then
the total shift in formulae below would be by two units, which is less natural on the lattice.)
Put


2
^
r
−rτ − tτ
−1
−1
(τ ⊕ id) · rd =
,
rdτ =
−rτ + tτ
r
rτ = τ ⊗ id · r, rτ

−1

= τ −1 ⊗ id · r =id ⊗ τ · r.

Put G = GΓ , G∗ = G∗ Γ . The action of τ extends to G and to G∗ in an obvious way. As
in section 3.2.1 we may embed G∗ into the direct product G × G. By definition, the twisted
Poisson bracket on G∗ is given by
∗

{ϕ, ψ}τ = hhrdτ , Dϕ ∧ Dψii − hhrd D′ ϕ ∧ D′ ψii ,
where Dϕ, D′ ϕ ∈ g ⊕ g are the two-component left and right differentials of ϕ.
We may push forward the Poisson bracket from G∗ to G using the factorization map. More
precisely:
Proposition 3.10 There exists a unique Poisson structure on G (which we shall still denote
∗
by {, }τ ) such that the twisted factorization map G∗ → G : (x+ , x− ) 7−→ xτ+ x−1
− becomes a
Poisson mapping. This Poisson structure is given by
∗

′
′
{ϕ, ψ}τ = hr, Dϕ ∧ Dψi +
D hr, D ϕ ∧ D ψi E
−1

− hrτ , Dϕ ∧ D′ ψi − rτ , D′ ϕ ∧ Dψ
D −1
E
− htτ , Dϕ ∧ D′ ψi + tτ , D′ ϕ ∧ Dψ , ϕ, ψ ∈ C ∞ (G) ,

(3.23)

30

M.A. Semenov-Tian-Shansky

We shall denote the Lie group G equipped with the Poisson structure (3.23) by Gτ , for
∗
short. Equivalent description of the bracket {, }τ for linear groups: let again LV = ρV (L) ; then
 1 2
LV , LV

∗

= rL1V L2V + L1V L2V r − L1V rτ L2V − L2V rτ
−L1V tτ L2V − L2V tτ

−1

−1

L1V

(3.24)

L1V

Another obvious Poisson structure on G is the Sklyanin bracket which corresponds to the Lie
bialgebra (g, g∗ ) . Let us consider the following action of G on Gτ called the (lattice) gauge
action:
x : T 7−→ xτ T x−1 .
Theorem 3.11 (i) The gauge action G×Gτ → Gτ is a Poisson group action. (ii) The Casimir
∗
functions of {, }τ coincide with the gauge invariants. (iii) Let M : Gτ → G be the monodromy
map,
M : T = (T1 , T2 , ..., TN ) 7−→ TN · ·T1 ;
we equip the target space with Poisson structure (3.11). Then M is a Poisson map and the
Casimirs of Gτ coincide with the spectral invariants of the monodromy. (iv) Spectral invariants
of the monodromy are in involution with respect to the Sklyanin bracket on G and generate
lattice Lax equations on G.
Parallels with theorem 2.3 are completely obvious.
3.2.3. Twisting for loop algebras. Our last example of twisting is based on the outer automorphisms of loop algebras. We shall use the notation and definitions introduced in section
2.2.2. Let g be a simple Lie algebra, Lg the corresponding loop algebra with the standard
∗
trigonometric r-matrix, and let Lgr = (Lg) be the dual algebra. The Lie group which corresponds to Lg is the group LG of polynomial loops with values in G; the elements
of the dual

Poisson group may be identified with pairs of formal series T + (z), T − (z −1 ) ,
T ± (z) =

X

n≥0



T ± [±n] z ±n , T ± [0] ∈ B± , π+ T + [0] · π− T − [0] = 1

(here π± : B± → H are canonical projections). The group (LG)∗ is pro-algebraic and its affine
ring is generated by the matrix coefficients of T ± [n] .
The next proposition describes the Poisson structure on the affine ring of (LG)∗ . Let t ∈ g⊗g
be the canonical element (tensor Casimir) which represents the inner product h, i in g. Let δ (x)
be the Dirac delta,
∞
X
δ (x) =
xn
n=−∞

(observe that t · δ (z/w) represents the kernel of the identity operator acting in Lg).

Quantum and Classical Integrable Systems

31

∗

Proposition 3.12 The Poisson bracket on (LG) which corresponds to the standard Lie bialgebra structure on Lg is given by
h z
i
T1± (z), T2± (w) = r
, T1± (z)T2±(w) ,
h z
i
 zw 
 +

−
+
−
T1 (z), T2 (w) = r
, T1 (z)T2 (w) + δ
t, T1+ (z)T2− (w) ,
w
w


(3.25)

where r (x) is the trigonometric r-matrix.

∗

We pass to the description of the twisted structure on (LG) .
Lemma 3.13 Aut (Lg, Lgr ) is the extended Cartan subgroup Ĥ = H × C×
By definition, p ∈ C× acts on Lg by sending X (z) 7−→ X (pz) ; we shall denote the corresponding dilation operator by Dp . The action of H gives nothing new, as compared with our
∗
first example (section 2.2.1). To describe the twisting of the Poisson structure on (LG) by the
action of C× we start with the r-matrix


r(z/w)
−r(z/w) − tδ(z/w)
rd (z/w) =
−r(z/w) + tδ(z/w)
r(z/w)
V
(as usual, rd (z/w) does not belong to the 2 (Lg ⊕ Lg), but is well defined as a kernel of a
linear operator acting in Lg ⊕ Lg). For p ∈ C× we define the twisted r-matrix by

2
^
−1
rd (z/w) = (Dp ⊕ Dp ) · rd (z/w) =
p

r(z/w)
−r(pz/w) − tδ(pz/w)
−r(z/pw) + tδ(z/pw)
r(z/w)



.

∗

Definition 3.2 The twisted Poisson bracket on (LG) is given by
i
h z
∗
, T1± (z)T2± (w) ,
T1± (z), T2± (w) p = r
w
 pz 
z
 +
∗
−
+
−
T1 (z), T2 (w) p = r
T1 (z)T2 (w) − T1+ (z)T2− (w)r
w
 zw
 pz 
+
−
+
−
+δ
t T1 (z)T2 (w) − T1 (z)T2 (w)δ
t
w
w


(3.26)

Define the new generating function (‘full current’) by
T (z) = T + (pz)T − (p−1 z)−1 ;
clearly, the coefficients of T (z) generate the affine ring of (LG)∗ .

(3.27)

32

M.A. Semenov-Tian-Shansky

Proposition 3.14 The current T (z) satisfies the following Poisson bracket relations:
∗

{T1 (z) , T2 (w)}p =
z
r
T1 (z) T2 (w) + T1 (z) T2 (w) r

 w
w 2 
z
p z
T2 (w) − T2 (w) r
T1 (z)
−T1 (z) r
w
p2 w
 2 


p z
z
−T1 (z) δ
t T2 (w) + T2 (w) δ
t T1 (z) .
w
p2 w
z

(3.28)

The existence of twisting in the affine case is due to the existence of the non-trivial central
extension of the loop algebra. (This should be compared with the situation in our first example,
where the central extension is trivial because all automorphisms of simple Lie algebras are
inner.) More precisely, we have the following result. Let ω be the 2-cocycle on Lg defined by
ω (X, Y ) = Resz=0 hX (z) , z∂z Y (z)i dz/z.

(3.29)
∗

c be the central extension of Lg determined by this cocycle, and Lg
c the semidirect
Let Lg
∗
×
product of (Lg) and C .


∗
c Lg
c
Proposition 3.15 Lg,
is a Lie bialgebra.
∗

c is the semidirect product C× ⋉ (LG)∗ ; it
The Poisson Lie group which corresponds to Lg
×
is easy to see that the affine coordinate on C is central with respect to the Poisson structure
on C× ⋉ (LG)∗ ; fixing its value, we get the family of Poisson brackets {, }∗p on (LG)∗ .
In section 4.2 we shall discuss a similar phenomenon for quantum systems associated with
quasitriangular Hopf algebras.
3.3

Sklyanin Bracket on G (z)

In our previous example we have described the Poisson structure associated with the loop
∗
algebra, namely, the bracket on the dual group (LG) ; applications to lattice systems involve
the Poisson structure on the loop group itself. As a matter of fact, this was the first example of
a Poisson Lie group which appeared prior to their formal definition (Sklyanin (1979)). To put it
more precisely, let g be a complex semisimple Lie algebra, G a linear complex Lie group with the
Lie algebra g. Let G(z) be the associated loop group, i.e., the group of rational functions with
values in G. We may regard G(z) as an affine algebraic group defined over C (z) . Let us again fix
a faithful representation (ρ, V ) of G; the affine ring Aaf f of G(z) is generated by ‘tautological
functions’ which assign to L ∈ G (z) the matrix coefficients of LV (z) ∈ EndV ⊗ C(z). The
Poisson bracket on the affine ring of G(z) is defined by the following formula (Sklyanin (1979)),
 1


LV (u), L2V (v) = rV (u, v), L1V (u)L2V (v) .
(3.30)

Quantum and Classical Integrable Systems

33

(By an abuse of notation, we do not distinguish between the generators of Aaf f and their values
at L ∈ G (z) in the l.h.s. of this formula.) Bracket (3.30) defines the structure of a Poisson-Lie
group on G(z). Equivalent formulation:
Let ∆ : Aaf f → Aaf f ⊗ Aaf f be the coproduct in Aaf f induced by the group multiplication
in G (z) :
˙ V (z) ,
∆ (LV (z)) = LV (z) ⊗L
or, in a less condensed notation,

 X
kj
∆ Lij
(z)
=
Lik
V (z) ⊗ LV (z) .
V

(3.31)

k

Then ∆ is a morphism of Poisson algebras (in other words,
{∆ϕ, ∆ψ} = ∆ {ϕ, ψ}
for any ϕ, ψ ∈ Aaf f ).
The Lax matrix LV (u) in this context is basically a tautological mapping which assigns to
an element L ∈ G(z) the matrix LV (u) ∈ End V ⊗ C (u) . Alternatively, for any Poisson submanifold M ⊂ G(z) the Lax matrix may be regarded as an embedding map M ֒→ G(z) → End
V ⊗C (u) . An explicit description of all Poisson submanifolds in G(z) follows from the theory of
dressing transformations (Semenov-Tian-Shansky (1994b)); for our present goals it suffices to
know that rational functions with a prescribed divisor of poles form a finite-dimensional Poisson submanifold in G(z); moreover, since the Poisson structure is multiplicative, the product of
Poisson submanifolds is again a Poisson submanifold. Generic Poisson submanifolds correspond
to functions with simple poles which may be written in multiplicative form
LV (z) =

x
Y
i

(I −

Xi
).
z − zi

(3.32)

In other words, the description of Poisson submanifolds is tantamount to the choice of an Ansatz
for the Lax matrix; the free parameters in this Ansatz (e.g., the residues Xi ) become dynamical
variables. Spectral invariants of ’Lax matrices’ of this type may be used to generate completely
integrable lattice Lax equations. More precisely, to get such system one may proceed as follows:
– Pick a Poisson submanifold M ⊂ G(z).
– Consider the product space MN ⊂ G(z) Z/N Z and the monodromy map m : G(z) × ... ×
G(z) → G(z) (more precisely, its restriction to MN ).
– Choose any central function H on G(z) as a Hamiltonian; its pullback to MN defines a
lattice Lax equation.
Under some
mild assumptions on the choice of M, H defines a completely integrable system

on m MN ; its pullback to MN still remains completely integrable; this may be regarded as
the main content of the Inverse Scattering Method (in this slightly simplified setting).
The study of Lax systems on the lattice thus breaks naturally into two parts: (a) Solve the
Lax equation for the monodromy. (b) Lift the solutions back to G(z)N . The second stage (by
no means trivial) is the inverse problem, sensu strictu.

34

M.A. Semenov-Tian-Shansky

4

Quantization

4.1

Linear case

Speaking informally, quantization consists in replacing Poisson bracket relations with commutation relations in an associative algebra. We shall have to distinguish between linear and
quadratic cases (as explained in the previous section, this difference stems from the different
Hopf structures on the algebras of observables). The linear case is easier, since we remain in the
conventional setting of Lie groups and Lie algebras. Quantization of quadratic Poisson bracket
relations (3.7) leads to quasitriangular Hopf algebras.
The standard way to quantize the algebra Acl = S(g) (equipped, as usual, with the LiePoisson bracket of g ) is to replace it with the universal enveloping algebra U(g). Let me briefly
recall the corresponding
construction.
S
Let U(g) = n≥0 Un be the canonical filtration of U(g), and S(g) = ⊕n≥0 Sn the canonical
grading of S(g). Clearly, Sn ≃ Un /Un−1 . Let grn : Un → Sn be the canonical projection. If
u ∈ Un , v ∈ Um , their commutator [u, v] ∈ Un+m−1 . It is easy to see that grn+m−1 ([u, v]) =
{grn u, grm v} is precisely the Lie-Poisson bracket; hence U(g) is a quantization of S(g).
Alternatively, let ~ be a formal parameter. Put g~ = g ⊗k k [[~]]; we rescale the commutator
in g~ by putting [X, Y ]~ = ~ [X, Y ] . Let U (g~ )be the universal enveloping algebra of g~ , and
~ U (g~ ) be its maximal ideal consisting of formal series in ~ with zero constant term; the
quotient algebra U (g~ ) /~ U (g~ ) is canonically isomorphic to S(g) . Let p : U (g~ ) → S (g) be
the canonical projection; then {p (x) , p (y)} = p ~−1 (xy − yx) for any x, y ∈ U (g~ ). (In the
sequel we prefer to set ~ = 1 and so the first definition will be more convenient.)
Let r ∈ Endg be a classical r-matrix. As we have seen, the phase spaces of Lax systems
associated with (g, r) are coadjoint orbits of gr ; the Hamiltonians are obtained from the Casimir
g
elements H ∈ S (g) via the isomorphism S (gr ) → S (g) described in theorem 2.3. The quantum
g
counterpart of S (g) is the center Z ⊂ U (g) of the universal enveloping algebra. Moreover,
under favorable conditions there is a nice correspondence between coadjoint orbits of a Lie
algebra and unitary representations of the corresponding Lie group. Thus we may establish
the following heuristic vocabulary which describes the correspondence between classical and
quantum systems:
Linear Classical Case
Linear Quantum case
S(g)
U(g)
Classical r-matrices
Classical r-matrices
g
Casimir functions (S (g)) ⊂ S (g) Casimir operators Z ⊂ U (g)
S(gr )
U(gr )
Coadjoint orbits in g∗r
Irreducible U (gr )-modules
Notice that, in the linear case, classical r-matrices are used in the quantum case as well!
The following theorem is an exact analogue of theorem 2.3
Let (g, r) be a Lie algebra equipped with a classical r-matrix r ∈ Endg satisfying (2.8) .
Let gr be the corresponding Lie algebra (with the same underlying linear space). Put r± =
1
2 (r ± id); then (2.8) implies that r± : gr → g are Lie algebra homomorphisms. Extend them

Quantum and Classical Integrable Systems

35

to homomorphisms U(gr ) → U(g) which we denote by the same letters. These morphisms also
agree with the standard Hopf structure on U(g), U(gr ). Define the action
U(gr ) ⊗ U(g) → U (g)
by setting
x·y =
where ∆x =

P

(1)

xi

(2)

⊗ xi

X

(2)

(1)

r+ (xi ) y r− (xi )′ , x ∈ U(gr ), y ∈ U(g),

(4.1)
(4.2)

is the coproduct and a 7→ a′ is the antipode map.

Theorem 4.1 (i) U(g) is a free filtered Hopf U(gr )-module generated by 1 ∈ U(g). (ii) Let
i : U(g) → U(gr ) be the induced isomorphism of filtered linear spaces; its restriction to Z ⊂ U (g)
is an algebra homomorphism; in particular, i (Z) ⊂ U(gr ) is commutative.
Let u ⊂ gr be an ideal, s = gr /u the quotient algebra, and p : U (gr ) → U (s) be the canonical
projection; restricting p to the subalgebra Ir = ir (Z) we get a commutative subalgebra in U (s) ;
we shall say that the corresponding elements of U (s) are obtained by specialization.
In particular, let g = g+ +g− be a splitting of g into a linear sum of two its Lie subalgebras;
let P : U(g) → U(g− ) be the projection onto U(g− ) in the decomposition
U(g) = U(g− ) ⊕ g+ U(g).
Corollary 4.2 The restriction of P to the subalgebra Z ⊂ U(g) of Casimir elements is an
algebra homomorphism.
4.1.1. Quantum reduction. The quantum analogue of symplectic induction discussed in
section 2.1.1 is the ordinary induction. For completeness we recall the standard definitions (cf.,
for example, Dixmier (1974)). Let g be a Lie algebra. Let us denote by Repg the category of
U (g) -modules. Let b ⊂ g be a Lie subalgebra. In complete analogy with section 2.2.1 we
construct the induction functor Indgb : Repb
Rep
Ng which associates to each U (b)-module an
U (g)-module. Namely, we put Indgb (V ) = U (g) U (b) V, where U (g) is regarded as a right
N
N
U (b)-module. [By definition, U (g) U (b) V is the quotient of U (g) C V over its submodule
N
generated by (u ⊗ v) · X, u ∈ U (g) , v ∈ V, X ∈ U (b) ; the (right) action of U (b) on U (g) C V
is defined by


X
uS X (i) ⊗ X(i) v,
(u ⊗ v) · X =
P

i

(i)

⊗ X(i) is the coproduct in U (b) and S is its antipode. In physical
where ∆X =
iX
terms passing to the quotient means that we impose ’constraints on the wave functions’; these
constraints express invariance of wave functions with respect to the diagonal action of U (b) .]
The structure of a U (g)-module in Indgb (V ) is induced by the left action of U (g) on itself.
Fix a point F ∈ b∗ and assume that lF is a Lagrangian subalgebra subordinate to F. In that
case F defines
N a character of lF ; let VF be the corresponding 1-dimensional U (lF )-module. Put
V = U (b) U (lF ) VF . V is a natural U (b)-module associated with the coadjoint orbit of F.

36

M.A. Semenov-Tian-Shansky

Proposition 4.3 Indgb (V ) ≃ IndglF (VF ) .
Informally, we may say that an U(g)-module associated with a coadjoint orbit admitting a
Lagrangian polarization may be induced from a 1-dimensional module.
Let us now return to the setting of theorem 4.1. Let (g, r) be a Lie algebra equipped with a
classical r-matrix r ∈ End g satisfying (2.8) . We regard U (g) as a U (gr )-module with respect
to the action (4.2). Let V be a U (gr )-module.
Proposition 4.4 V ≃ U (g)

N

U (gr ) V

as a linear space.

Since half of U (gr ) is acting
N on U (g) on the left and the other half on the right, the structure
of a U (g)-module in U (g) U (gr ) V is destroyed. However, the structure of Z-module in U (g)
survives tensoring with V over U (gr ).
Proposition 4.5 For any ζ ∈ Z, u ∈ U (g) , v ∈ V, ζu ⊗ v = u ⊗ ir (ζ) v.
This gives a new proof of theorem 4.1.
Fix F ∈ g∗r and let lF ⊂ gr be a Lagrangian subalgebra
N subordinate to F . Let VF be the
corresponding 1-dimensional U (lF ) -module. Then U (g) U (lF ) VF may be identified with V.
Let us assume now that g = g+ +̇ g− and the r-matrix is given
N by (2.10); in that case
U (gr ) ≃ U (g+ ) ⊗ U (g− ) . Let W be a U (g− )-module, W = U (g) U (g− ) W ; we regard W as
a left U (g)-module. There is a canonical embedding W ֒→ W : w 7→ 1 ⊗ w. Let W∗ be the dual
module regarded as a right U (g)-module, and let W0∗ ⊂ W be the subspace of U (g+ )-invariants.
Lemma 4.6 W0∗ is isomorphic to the dual of W.
This is an easy corollary of the decomposition
U (g) ≃ U (g+ ) ⊗ U (g− ) ≃ g+ U (g) ⊕ U (g− ) .

P i
e ⊗ ei ∈ W0∗ ⊗W be
Fix a basis {ei } in W, and let ei be the dual basis in W0∗ . Let Ω =
the canonical element; it defines a natural mapping
W → W : ϕ 7→ hϕiΩ =

X

ei , ϕ ei .

i

Proposition 4.7 For any ς ∈ Z, ϕ ∈ W, hςϕiΩ = iς hϕiΩ .
Informally, we may say that quantum Hamiltonians acting in W are radial parts of the
Casimir operators. (The reasons for this terminology will be obvious from our next example.)

Quantum and Classical Integrable Systems

37

4.1.2. Toda lattice. Our first example is the generalized open Toda lattice. We retain the
notation of section 2.2.1. Let again g be a real split semisimple Lie algebra, g = k+̇a+̇n its
Iwasawa decomposition, b = a+̇n the Borel subalgebra. Let dp ⊂ b (p ≥ 0) be the generalized
diagonals defined in (2.17). The subalgebras b(p) = ⊕r≥p dr define a decreasing ad b-invariant
filtration in b. Put pk = ⊕0≤p≤k s (dp ) , where s : g → p : X 7−→ 12 (id − σ) X is the projection
onto the subspace of anti-invariants of the Cartan involution σ. Put s = b/b(2) . Let L ∈ p1 ⊗s ⊂
p1 ⊗ U (s) be the canonical element induced by the natural pairing p1 × b/b(2) → R. Let
P : U(g) → U (b) be the projection map onto U (b) in the decomposition U(g) = U(b) ⊕ U(g)k ,
p : U(b) → U (s) the specialization map. Let us put Is = p ◦ P (Z) , where as usual Z is the
center of U (g) . Fix a faithful representation (ρ, V ) of g and put LV = (ρ ⊗ id) L.
Proposition 4.8 (i) Is is a commutative subalgebra in U (s) ; moreover, Z → Is : z 7−→ Hz is
an algebra isomorphism. (ii) Is is generated by Hk = trV LkV ∈ U (s) , k = 1, 2, ...
Recall that s = a ⋉ u, where u = n/ [n, n] , and the corresponding Lie
P group is S = A ⋉ U,
U = N/N ′ . Let OT be the coadjoint orbit of S described in (2.19), f = α∈P (eα + e−α ) ∈ OT
the marked point, Lf = U the corresponding Lagrangian subgroup, Vf = C the 1-dimensional
U -module which corresponds to f ; we may also regard it as a U (u)-module.
Proposition 4.9 (i) The irreducible U (s)-module associated with OT is the induced module
U (s) ⊗U (u) Vf . (ii) The corresponding unitary representation space H may be identified with
L2 (a) . (iii) Let ∆ ∈ Z be the quadratic Casimir operator which corresponds to the Killing
form. Then H∆ is precisely the Toda Hamiltonian HT acting in H; it is given by


X
∂
∂
HT = − (∂, ∂) +
.
exp 2α (q) , ∂ =
, ...,
∂q1
∂qn
α∈P

In other words, geometric quantization of the Toda Hamiltonian agrees with its ‘naive’
Schroedinger quantization. What is nontrivial, of course, is the consistent definition of the
quantum integrals of motion which correspond to higher Casimirs.
Let us now turn to the description of the Toda lattice based on the reduction procedure.
In section 4.1.1 we discussed the reduction using the language of U (g)-modules; in the present
setting we may assume that all these modules are actually integrable, i.e., come from representations of the corresponding Lie groups. In particular, the action of U (g) on itself by left (right)
multiplications corresponds to the regular representation of G; we may regard H = L2 (G) as a
result of quantization of T ∗ G.
We are led to the following construction. Let χf be the character of N defined by
χf (exp X) = exp if (X) , X ∈ n.
Let Hf be the space of smooth functions on G satisfying the functional equation
ψ (kxn) = χf (n) ψ (x) , k ∈ K, n ∈ N

(4.3)

By Iwasawa decomposition, any such function is uniquely determined by its restriction to
A ⊂ G. Thus there is an isomorphism i : C ∞ (a) → Hf : i (ψ) (kan) = χf (n) ψ (log a) .

38

M.A. Semenov-Tian-Shansky

Lemma 4.10 Hf is invariant with respect to the action of Z ⊂ U (g) .
For ζ ∈ Z let δ (ζ) ∈ EndC ∞ (a) be its radial part defined by
ζi (ψ) = i (δ (ζ) ψ) , ψ ∈ C ∞ (a) .
Proposition 4.11 We have δ (ζ) = Hζ , i.e., the radial parts of the Casimir operators coincide
with the quantum integrals of the Toda lattice.
We are interested in eigenfunctions of the Toda Hamiltonian and higher Toda integrals.
By proposition 4.11 this is equivalent to description of the eigenfunctions of Casimir operators
on G which satisfy the functional equation (4.3) . At the formal level this problem may be
solved as follows. Let (π, V) be an infinitesimally irreducible representation of G, V∗ , the dual
representation. Assume that w ∈ V satisfies
π (n) w = χf (n) w for n ∈ N.

(4.4)

(In that case w is called a Whittaker vector.) Assume, moreover, that in the dual space V∗
there is a K-invariant vector v ∈ V∗ . Put
ψ (x) = hv, π (x) wi .

(4.5)

Proposition 4.12 ψ is an eigenfunction of Z and satisfies the functional equation (4.3) .
Thus ψ is essentially a Toda lattice eigenfunction.
This formal argument can be made rigorous. Since the Toda Hamiltonian describes scattering in a repulsive potential, its spectrum is continuous; so there are no chances that ψ (which is
called a Whittaker function) is in L2 . The problem is to find representations of G such that ψ has
the usual properties of a continuous spectrum eigenfunction (i.e., the wave packets smoothed
down with appropriate amplitudes are in L2 ). As it appears, the correct class are spherical
principal series representations.
Definition 4.1 Let B = M AN be the Borel subgroup in G, λ ∈ a∗ ; let χλ : B → C be the
1-dimensional representation defined by
χλ (man) = exp hλ − ρ, log ai .
The spherical principal series πλ is the induced representation, πλ = indG
B χλ .
Principal series representations are infinitesimally irreducible and hence define a homomorphism π : Z → P (a∗ ) into the algebra of polynomials on a∗
π : z 7−→ πz , where πλ (z) := πz (λ) · id.
By a classical Harish Chandra theorem (Dixmier (1974)) π is actually an isomorphism onto the
W
subalgebra P (a∗ ) ⊂ P (a∗ ) of the Weyl group invariants. Hence the set of principal series
representations is sufficiently ample to separate points of the algebraic spectrum of Z.

Quantum and Classical Integrable Systems

39

The algebraic theory of Whittaker vectors is exposed in Kostant (1978), the analytic theory
leading to the Plancherel theorem for the Toda lattice is outlined in Semenov-Tian-Shansky
(1994a). A remarkable point is that the eigenfunctions of the quantum system are expressed
as matrix coefficients of appropriate representations of the ’hidden symmetry group’. This is a
special case of a very general situation. Below we shall discuss another example of this kind,
for which the hidden symmetry algebra is infinite-dimensional.
4.1.2. Gaudin model. The treatment of the Gaudin model is considerably more difficult,
since in this case the hidden symmetry group is infinite-dimensional. Remarkably, the general
pattern described in section 4.1.1 is fully preserved in this case as well.
The algebra of observables for the Gaudin model is simply U(gN ). Let Vλ be a finitedimensional highest weight representation of g with dominant integral highest weight λ. Let
λ = (λ1 , ...λN ) be the set of such weights; put Vλ = ⊗i Vλi . The space Vλ is a natural Hilbert
space associated with the Gaudin model; so the ‘kinematical’ part of quantization problem in
this case is fairly simple. Let us fix also an auxiliary representation (ρ, V ). By analogy with the
classical case, we may introduce the quantum Lax operator,
LV (z) ∈ EndV (z) ⊗ gN ⊂ EndV (z) ⊗ U(gN );

(4.6)

the definition remains exactly the same, but now we embed gN into the universal enveloping
algebra U(gN ) instead of the symmetric algebra S(gN ). The commutation relations for LV (z)
essentially reproduce the Poisson brackets relations (2.28), but this time the l.h.s. is a matrix
of true commutators:
[LV (u) ⊗, LV (v)] = [rV (u, v), LV (u) ⊗ 1 + 1 ⊗ LV (v)] .

(4.7)

The key point in (4.7) is the interplay of commutation relations in the quantum algebra U(gN )
and the auxiliary matrix algebra EndV (z). Formula (4.7) was the starting point of QISM (as
applied to models with linear commutation relations). Put
S(u) =

1
trV (LV (u))2 ;
2

(4.8)

using (4.7), it is easy to check that S(u) form a commutative family of Hamiltonians (called
Gaudin Hamiltonians) in U(gN )(see, e.g., Jurčo (1989) ). An important property of this commuting family is that it possesses at least one ‘obvious’ eigenvector | 0 >∈ H, the tensor product
of highest weight vectors in Vλi ; it is usually called the vacuum vector .
One of the key ideas of QISM is to construct other eigenvectors by applying to the vacuum
creation operators which are themselves rational functions of z. This construction is calledthe
algebraic Bethe Ansatz. Assume that g = sl2 and let {E, F, H} be its standard basis. Put
F (z) =

X F (i)
,
z − zi

zi ∈D

(4.9)

40

M.A. Semenov-Tian-Shansky

where F (i) acts as F in the i-th copy of sl2 and as id in other places. The Bethe vector is, by
definition,
| w1 , w2 , ...wm >= F (w1 )F (w2 )...F (wm ) | 0 > .
(4.10)
The Lax matrix (4.6) applied to | w1 , w2 , ...wm > becomes triangular, i.e.,


a(u, w1 , w2 , ...wm )
∗
L(u) | w1 , w2 , ...wm >=
;
0
d(u, w1 , w2 , ...wm )
after a short computation this yields
S(u) | w1 , w2 , ...wm >=
sm (u) | w1 , w2 , ...wm > +
where
fj =

PN

fj
j=1 u−wj | w1 , w2 , ..., wj−1 , u, wj+1 , ..., wm >,

N
X

X
2
λi
−
wj − zi
wj − ws
i=1
s6=j

and sm (u) is a rational function,
sm (u) = c2V χm (u)2 − cV ∂u χm (u),
PN λi
Pm
2
χm (u) = i=1 u−z
− i=1 u−w
.
i
j

(4.11)

(The constant cV depends on the choice of V.) If all fj vanish, | w1 , w2 , ...wm > is an eigenvector
of S(u) with the eigenvalue sm (u); equations
N
X

X
2
λi
−
=0
w
−
z
w
−
ws
j
i
j
i=1

(4.12)

s6=j

are called the Bethe Ansatz equations. (Notice that (4.12) is precisely the condition that sm (u)
be nonsingular at u = wi .)
For general simple Lie algebras the study of spectra of the Gaudin Hamiltonians becomes
rather complicated; one way to solve this problem is to treat it inductively by choosing in
g a sequence of embedded Lie subalgebras of lower rank and applying the algebraic Bethe
Ansatz to these subalgebras. An alternative idea (which is completely parallel to the treatment
of the Toda lattice in section 4.1) is to interpret the Hamiltonians as radial parts of (infinite
dimensional) Casimir operator of the ‘global’ Lie algebra gD .
It is impossible to apply theorem 4.1 immediately in the affine case, since the center of U(gD )
is trivial. The point is that the invariants in the (suitably completed) symmetric algebra S(gD )
are infinite series; an attempt to quantize these expression leads to divergent expressions, unless
some kind of ordering prescription is introduced. The commutation relations for the normally
ordered operators are already nontrivial and they do not lie in the center of U(gD ). However, the
situation can be amended by first passing to the central extension of U(gD ) and then considering
the quotient algebra Uk ( gD ) = U (^gD )/(c − k). It is known that for the critical value of the

Quantum and Classical Integrable Systems

41

central charge k = −h∨ (here h∨ is the dual Coxeter number of g) the (appropriately completed)
algebra U−h∨ (gD ) possesses an ample center.
Let us recall first of all the construction of Sugawara operators. Let Lg = g ((z)) be the
‘local’ algebra of formal Laurent series with coefficients in g,Let ω be the 2-cocycle on Lg defined
by
ω(X, Y ) = Resz=0 hX, ∂z Y i dz
It is well known that highest weight representations of Lg are actually projective and correspond
c Lg ⊕ C c of Lg defined by this cocycle. Let us consider formally
to the central extension Lg≃
the canonical element J ∈ Lg ⊗ Lg which corresponds to the inner product
(X, Y ) = Resz=0 hX, Y i dz

in Lg . Fix a finite-dimensional representation (ρ, V ) of g; it extends to the ‘evaluation reprec
sentation’ of Lg in V ⊗C C ((z)) . Let (πk , V) be any level k highest weight representation of Lg.
c
(This means that the central element c ∈ Lg acts by πk (c) = k · id.) Put J(z) = (πk ⊗ ρ) J.
Since J is not a proper element in Lg ⊗ Lg , J(z) is a formal series infinite in both directions;
however, its coefficients are well defined. Namely, let {ea } be a basis in g ; the algebra Lg is
spanned by the vectors ea (n) = ea ⊗ z n , n ∈ Z. It is easy to see that the coefficients of J(z)
are finite linear combinations of the vectors πk (ea (n) .)
Put
∞
X
1
2
Tn un ,
(4.13)
T (u) = : trJ (u) :, T (u) =
2
n=−∞
where the normal ordering :: is defined in the following way:

: ea (n) eb (m) := e b (m) ea (n) , if n < 0, m ≥ 0,
: ea (n) eb (m) := ea (n) eb (m) otherwise.
Due to normal ordering the coefficients of T (u) are well defined operators in EndV. It is well
known that
h
i

g
[Tm , Tn ] = (k + h∨ ) (m − n) Tm+n + k dim
n3 − n δn,−m ,
12
(4.14)
[Tm , πk (ea (n))] = − (k + h∨ ) πk (ea (n + m)) .
Therefore, if k 6= −h∨ , Tn generate the Virasoro algebra; for k = −h∨ the elements Tn , n ∈ Z,
are central.
c is generated by Tn , n ∈ Z, ; for
One can show that for g = sl2 the center of U−h∨ (Lg)
higher rank algebras there are other Casimirs. An attempt to construct these higher Casimir
n
elements by considering : trJ (u) : for arbitrary n ≥ 2 runs into trouble. However, by applying
a different technique Feigin and Frenkel (1992) have proved that for the critical central charge
the algebra of Casimirs is very ample: essentially, there exists
 element with prescribed
 a Casimir
c .
symbol and hence there is an isomorphism S(Lg)Lg → Z U−h∨ Lg
The situation with the Lie algebra gD is basically the same as described above. This allows
to realize the Gaudin Hamiltonians as radial parts of appropriate Casimir operators. Let us

42

M.A. Semenov-Tian-Shansky

describe this construction (due to Feigin, Frenkel and Reshetikhin (1994)) more precisely. Let
++
the Lie algebras gD , g+
D , gD , g(D) be as above. It will be convenient to add one more point
{u} to the divisor D and to attach to it the trivial representation V0 of g. (This will not affect
the Hilbert space of our model, since ⊗zi ∈D Vλi ⊗ V0 = (⊗zi ∈D Vλi ) ⊗ C ≃ ⊗zi ∈D Vλi .) Thus we
write D′ = D ∪ {u} , etc. Let ω be the 2-cocycle on gD′ defined by
X
ω(X, Y ) =
Res(Xi , dYi ).
(4.15)
zi ∈D′

Let ^gD′ = gD′ ⊕ Cc be the central extension of gD′ defined by this cocycle. Note that since the
restriction of ω to the subalgebra g(D′ ) ⊂ gD′ is zero, the algebra g(D′ ) is canonically embedded
+
g+
into ^gD′ . Put ^
D′ = gD′ ⊕ Cc. Fix a highest weight representation V(λ,0) = ⊗zi ∈D Vλi ⊗ V0 of the
+
N +1
k
Lie algebra g
= gD′ /g++
g+
D′ as above and let V(λ,0) be the associated representation of ^
D′ on
k
which the center Cc acts by multiplication by k ∈ Z.. Let V(λ,0) be the induced representation
of ^gD′ ,
k
k
.
(4.16)
= U(^gD ) ⊗U (^g+ ′ ) V(λ,0)
V(λ,0)
D
∗

k
k
k
be the dual of V(λ,0) ,
There is a canonical embedding V(λ,0)
֒→ V(λ,0)
: v 7→ 1⊗v. Let V(λ,0)
∗

k
the subspace of g(D′ )−invariants. Decomposition (2.24) together with the
Hk(λ,0) ⊂ V(λ,0)
obvious isomorphism V(λ,0) ≃ Vλ immediately implies that H(λ,0) is canonically isomorphic
k,
→
to Vλ∗ . Let Ω ∈ Hλ ⊗ Vλ be the canonical element; it defines a natural mapping V(λ,0)
Vλ :ϕ 7→ hϕiΩ . (In Conformal Field Theory hϕiΩ are usually called correlation functions.) For
any x ∈ U (ĝD ) let γλ (x) ∈ EndVλ be the linear operator defined by the composition mapping
v 7→ hx(1 ⊗ v)iΩ , v ∈ Vλ.
Now suppose that k = −h∨ ; let again J be the canonical element which corresponds to
the inner product (2.25) in g((z)), J(z) = (id ⊗ ρ)T , T (z) = tr : J(z)2 : Let us embed
U−h∨ (g((z))) into U−h∨ (gD ) sending it to the extra place {u} ⊂ D′ to which we attached the
trivial representation of g.
Proposition 4.13 S(u) = γλ (JV (−2)) coincides with the Gaudin Hamiltonian.
Remark 4.1 Besides quadratic Hamiltonians associated with the Sugawara current there are
also higher commuting Hamiltonians which may be obtained using the methods of Feigin and
Frenkel (1992).
k
In the calculation above we started with a generalized Verma module V(λ,0)
; however, any
representation of the critical level will do. The problem is to find a sufficiently ample class of
critical level representations which will account for the spectrum of the Gaudin model. Note
that this construction is exactly similar to the description of the Toda eigenfunctions in the
finite-dimensional case. In the Toda case the correct class consisted of the spherical principal
series representations; an important point is that principal series representations separate points
of the algebraic spectrum of Z. Now, at the critical level the algebra of the Casimir operators

Quantum and Classical Integrable Systems

43

is extraordinary rich; hence generalized Verma modules which are parametrized by the dual
of the extended Cartan subalgebra b
a = a ⊕ C (i.e. depend on a finite number of parameters)
can not be used. Remarkably, there is another class of representations of gD , the Wakimoto
modules, which play the role of the principal series representations. Roughly, the idea is to use
the loop algebra La = a ⊗ C ((z)) as the substitute of the Cartan subalgebra, to extend its
characters trivially to Ln and to take the induced Lg -module. Due to normal ordering (which
is necessary, since after central extension La becomes a Heisenberg algebra), this construction
should be modified (among other things, this leads to a shift of the level, i.e., of the value of
the central charge, which becomes −h∨ ).
For g = sl2 the Wakimoto module of the critical level has the following explicit realization
(Frenkel (1995)). Let H be the Heisenberg algebra with generators an , a∗n , n ∈ Z, and relations
[an , a∗m ] = δn,−m .

(4.17)

Let F be the Fock representation of H with vacuum vector v satisfying an v = 0, n ≥ 0, a∗n v =
0, n > 0. Put
X
X
a (u) =
an u−n−1 , a∗ (u) =
a∗n u−n .
(4.18)
n∈Z

n∈Z

Let {E, F, H} be the standard basis of sl2 . Put E (n) = E ⊗z n , F (n) = F ⊗z n , H (n) = H ⊗z n ;
let
X
X
X
E [u] =
E (n) un , F [u] =
F (n) un , H [u] =
F (n) un
n∈Z

n∈Z

n∈Z

be the corresponding ‘generating functions’. For any formal power series χ (u) =
define the (projective) action of Lg on F by
E [u] = a (u) , H [u] = −2 : a (u) a∗ (u) : +χ (u) ,
F [u] = − : a (u) a∗ (u) a∗ (u) : −2∂u a∗ (u) + χ (u) a∗ (u) .

P

n∈Z χn u

−n−1

(4.19)

Thus we get an Lg-module structure in F which depends on χ (u) ; this is the Wakimoto module
of the critical level k = −2 (usually denoted by Wχ(u) ).
P
The Virasoro generators Tn , n ∈ Z, are scalar in Wχ(u) , Tn = qn ·id. Put q (u) = n∈Z qn un .
One can show that
1
1
2
(4.20)
q (u) = χ (u) − ∂u χ (u) ,
4
2
i.e., q is the Miura transform of χ. This means of course that



1
1
2
∂u − q (u) = ∂u − ∂u χ
∂u + ∂u χ ;
2
2
as a matter of fact, due to normal ordering, if we make a change of coordinates on the (formal)
disk, q transforms as a projective connection. Now a comparison with formula (4.11) suggests

44

M.A. Semenov-Tian-Shansky

that the Bethe Ansatz is related to a Wakimoto module with an appropriate choice of χ. Namely,
we consider the following global rational function
λ (u) =

N
X

m
X
λi
2
−
.
u − zi j=1 u − wj
i=1

Denote by λi (u − zi ) its expansion at the points zi, i = 1, ..., N, and by µj (u − wj ) its expansion
at the points wj , j = 1, ..., m. We have
λi (t) =

λi
2
+ ..., µj (t) = − + µj (0) + ...,
t
t

where
µj (0) =

N
X

X
λi
2
−
.
w
−
z
w
−
ws
j
i
j
i=1
s6=j

We want to attach the Wakimoto modules to the points on the Riemann sphere. To this end let
us observe that creation and annihilation operators (4.18) define a projective representation of
the ‘local’ algebra Γ = C ((u)) ⊕C ((u)) du consisting of formal series and formal differentials
with the cocycle
Ω0 ((ϕ1 , α1 ) , (ϕ2 , α2 )) = Resu=0 (ϕ1 α2 − ϕ2 α1 ) .
‘Global’ algebra is the direct sum of local algebras with the cocycle
X
Reszi (ϕ1 α2 − ϕ2 α1 ) .
Ω ((ϕ1 , α1 ) , (ϕ2 , α2 )) =
i

Now let us consider the tensor product of the Wakimoto modules attached to the points zi , wj ,
W=

N
O
i=1

Wλi (t)

m
O

Wµj (t) .

j=1

Let H be the corresponding ‘big’ Heisenberg algebra. The eigenfunctions of the Gaudin Hamiltonians may be constructed as the appropriate correlation functions associated with W . To
formulate the exact statement we need one more definition. Let V be a g ((t)) -module. For
X ∈ g, n ∈ Z we put X (n) = X ⊗ tn ∈ g ((t)) . A vector v ∈ V is called a singular vector of
imaginary weight if X (n) v = 0 for all X ∈ g, n ∈ Z , n ≥ 0. Let vj ∈ Wµj (t) be the vacuum
vector; put wj = a−1 vj , where a−1 is the creation operator introduced in (4.17) .
Lemma 4.14 . The vector wj is a singular vector of imaginary weight if and only if µj (0) = 0.
Note that this condition coincides with (4.12) .
Let M̃λi be the subspace of Wλi (t) ≃ F generated from the vacuum vector by the creation
operators a∗0 .

Quantum and Classical Integrable Systems

45

Lemma 4.15 M̃λi is stable with respect to the subalgebra g ⊂ Lg of constant loops and is
isomorphic to the dual of the Verma module Mλi over g = sl2 with the highest weight λi =
Rest=0 λi (t) .
c2 -action on F .
This assertion is immediate from the definition (4.19) of the sl
∗
Let W be the dual of W. . Let hz,w be the algebra of rational functions with values in the
Cartan subalgebra h ⊂ sl2 which are regular outside {z1 , ..., zN , w1 , ..., wm } . There is a natural
embedding of hz,w into the ‘big’ Heisenberg algebra H defined via expansion at each point of
the divisor {z1 , ..., zN , w1 , ..., wm } . Let Hz,w be the maximal abelian subalgebra of H which
contains Hz,w .
Lemma 4.16 The space of Hz,w -invariants in W∗ is 1-dimensional; it is generated by a functional τ whose value on the tensor product of the vacuum vectors of Wλi (t) , Wµj (t) is equal to
1; the restriction of τ to ⊗N
i=1 M̃λi ⊗ w1 ⊗ ... ⊗ wm is nontrivial.
N
Let ψ ∈ ⊗N
i=1 M̃λi . We may write τ (ψ) = hψ, φi where φ ∈ ⊗i=1 Mλi is a vector in the tensor
product of Verma modules over sl2 .

Theorem 4.17 (Feigin, Frenkel and Reshetikhin (1994)) If the Bethe equations (4.12) are
N
satisfied, φ ∈ ⊗N
i=1 Mλi is an eigenvector of the Gaudin Hamiltonians in ⊗i=1 Mλi with the
eigenvalue 4.11.
Remark 4.2 If the weights λi are dominant integral, there is a natural projection
N
π : ⊗N
i=1 Mλi → ⊗i=1 Vλi .

It is easy to see that π maps the eigenvectors of the Gaudin Hamiltonians in ⊗N
i=1 Mλi onto
those in ⊗N
i=1 Vλi .
The construction described above admits a generalization to arbitrary semisimple Lie algebras. We shall only write down the generalized Bethe equations. To parametrize a Bethe vector

N
first choose a set {w1 , ..., wm }, wj ∈ C, and assign to each wj a set of simple roots αij i=1 ,
one for each copy of g in gN . Let Fiij be the corresponding Chevalley generator of g acting nontrivially in the i-th copy of g. The straightforward generalization of the Bethe creation operator
(4.9) to the higher rank case is
N
X
Fiij
(4.21)
F (wj ) =
wj − zi
i=1
(Babujian and Flume (1993)). The problem with (4.21) is that these operators no longer commute with each other. Hence one cannot use a string of creation operators to produce an
eigenvector as it is done in (4.10) . The correct way to decouple them is to use the Wakimoto
modules Wµj (t) which correspond to the poles of the creation operator; as above, the eigenvectors are generated by the singular vectors of imaginary weight which exist if and only if the

46

M.A. Semenov-Tian-Shansky

constant term in the expansion of µj (t) satisfies certain orthogonality conditions. This leads to
the generalized Bethe equations:

N
X
(λi , αij ) X αis , αij
−
= 0, j = 1, ..., m.
(4.22)
wj − zi
wj − ws
i=1
s6=j

Bethe vectors are again computed as correlation functions.
Let us end this section with a brief remark on the Knizhnik-Zamolodchikov equations. Recall
that this is a system of equations satisfied by the correlation functions for an arbitrary value
of the central charge; the critical value c = −h∨ corresponds to the semiclassical limit for the
KZ system (small parameter before the derivatives). The outcome of this is two-fold: first, the
Bethe vectors for the Gaudin model appear naturally in the semiclassical asymptotics of the
solutions of the KZ system (Reshetikhin and Varchenko (1993)). Moreover, the exact integral
representation of the solutions (for any value of the central charge) also involves the Bethe
vectors (Feigin, Frenkel and Reshetikhin (1994)).
4.2

Quadratic case. Quasitriangular Hopf Algebras

For an expert in Quantum Integrability the Gaudin model is certainly a sort of a limiting
special case. The real thing starts with the quantization of quadratic Poisson bracket relations
(3.7). This is a much more complicated problem which eventually requires the whole machinery
of Quantum Groups (and has led to their discovery). The substitute for the Poisson bracket
relations (3.30) is the famous relation
R(u v −1 )L1 (u)L2 (v)R(u v −1 )−1 = L2 (v)L1 (u),

(4.23)

where R(u) is the quantum R-matrix satisfying the quantum Yang-Baxter identity
R12 (u)R13 (u v)R23 (v) = R23 (v)R13 (u v)R12 (u).

(4.24)

To bring a quantum mechanical system into Lax form one has to arrange quantum observables
into a Lax matrix L(u) (which is a rational function of u) and to find an appropriate R-matrix
satisfying (4.23), (4.24). The first examples of quantum Lax operators were constructed by
trial and error method; in combination with the Bethe Ansatz technique this has led to the
explicit solution of important problems (Sklyanin, Takhtajan and Faddeev (1979), Faddeev and
Takhtajan (1979), Faddeev (1980, 1984)).
The algebraic concept which brings order to the subject is that of quasitriangular Hopf algebra (Drinfeld (1987a)). Main examples of quasitriangular Hopf algebras arise as q-deformations
of universal enveloping algebras associated with Manin triples. Remarkably, the general pattern represented by Theorems 2.3, 4.1 survives q-deformation. The standard way to describe
quantum deformations of simple finite-dimensional or affine Lie algebras is by means of generators and relations generalizing the classical Chevalley-Serre relations (Drinfeld (1987a), Jimbo
(1986)). We shall recall this definition below in section 4.2.2 in the finite-dimensional case, and
in section 4.2.3 for the quantized universal enveloping algebra of the loop algebra L (sl2 ) . A

Quantum and Classical Integrable Systems

47

dual approach, due to Faddeev, Reshetikhin and Takhtajan (1989), is to construct quantum
universal enveloping algebras as deformations of coordinate rings on Lie groups (regarded as linear algebraic groups). Of course, construction of a quantum deformation of the Poisson algebra
F (G) was one of the first results of the quantum group theory and is, in fact, a direct generalization of the Baxter commutation relations RT 1 T 2 = T 2 T 1 R. A nontrivial fact, first observed
by Faddeev, Reshetikhin and Takhtajan, is that the dual Hopf algebra (usually described as a
q-deformation of the universal enveloping algebra) may also be regarded as a deformation of a
Poisson algebra of functions on the dual group. More generally, the FRT construction is related
to the quantum duality principle, which we shall now briefly discuss.
Let (g, g∗ ) be a factorizable Lie bialgebra, G, G∗ the corresponding dual Poisson groups,
F (G) , F (G∗ ) the associated Poisson-Hopf algebras of functions on G, G∗ , and Fq (G) , Fq (G∗ )
their quantum deformations. (For simplicity we choose the deformation parameter q to be the
same for both algebras.) The quantum duality principle asserts that these algebras are dual to
each other as Hopf algebras. More precisely, there exists a nondegenerate bilinear pairing
Fq (G) ⊗ Fq (G∗ ) → C [[q]]
which sets the algebras Fq (G) , Fq (G∗ ) into duality as Hopf algebras. Hence, in particular, we
have, up to an appropriate completion,
Fq (G∗ ) ≃ Uq (g) .
In the dual way, we have also

Fq (G) ≃ Uq (g∗ ) .

For factorizable Lie bialgebras the quantum deformations Fq (G) , Fq (G∗ ) may easily be constructed once we know the corresponding quantum R-matrices. An equivalence of this formulation to the definition of Drinfeld and Jimbo is not immediate and requires the full theory
of universal R-matrices. Namely, starting with Drinfeld’s definition of a quasitriangular Hopf
algebra we may construct ‘quantum Lax operators’ whose matrix coefficients generate the quantized algebras of functions Fq (G) , Fq (G∗ ) . Using explicit formulae for universal R-matrices
one can, in principle, express these generators in terms of the Drinfeld-Jimbo generators. In the
context of integrable models the FRT formulation has several important advantages: it allows
to state the quantum counterpart of the main commutativity theorem as well as a transparent
correspondence between classical and quantum integrable systems. The analogue of the FRT
realization in the affine case is nontrivial, the key point being the correct treatment of the
central element which corresponds to the central extension; it was described by Reshetikhin
and Semenov-Tian-Shansky (1990).
4.2.1. Factorizable Hopf algebras and the Faddeev-Reshetikhin-Takhtajan realization of quantized universal enveloping algebras.
Definition 4.2 Let A be a Hopf algebra with coproduct ∆ and antipode S; let ∆′ be the opposite
coproduct in A; A is called quasitriangular if
∆′ (x) = R∆(x)R−1

(4.25)

48

M.A. Semenov-Tian-Shansky

for all x ∈ A and for some distinguished invertible element R ∈ A ⊗ A (the universal R-matrix)
and, moreover,
(∆ ⊗ id) R = R13 R23 , (id ⊗ ∆) R = R13 R12 .
(4.26)
Identities (4.26) imply that R satisfies the Yang-Baxter identity
R12 R13 R23 = R23 R13 R12 .

(4.27)

(We use standard tensor notation to denote different copies of the spaces concerned.)
Let A0 be the dual Hopf algebra equipped with the opposite coproduct (in other words,
its coproduct is dual to the opposite product in A). Put R+ = R, R− = σ(R−1 ) (here σ is
the permutation map in A ⊗ A, σ(x ⊗ y) = y ⊗ x) and define the mappings R± : A0 → A :
f 7→ hf ⊗ id, R± i ; axioms (4.26) imply that R± are Hopf algebra homomorphisms. Define the
action A0 ⊗ A → A by
X (1)
X
(2)
(2)
(1)
(4.28)
fi ⊗ fi .
R+ (fi ) x S(R− (fi ), where ∆0 f =
f ◦x =
i

i

Definition 4.3 A is called factorizable if A is a free A0 -module generated by 1 ∈ A.
(Let us denote the corresponding linear isomorphism A0 → A by F for future reference.)
There are several important examples of factorizable Hopf algebras:
– Let A be an arbitrary Hopf algebra; then its Drinfeld double D (A) is factorizable
(Reshetikhin and Semenov-Tian-Shansky (1991)).
– Let g be a finite-dimensional semisimple Lie algebra; then A = Uq (g) is factorizable.
– Let ^
g be an affine Lie algebra; then A = Uq (^g) is factorizable.
(Observe that the last two cases are actually special cases of the first one; up to now, the
double remains the principal (if not the only) source of factorizable Hopf algebras.)
Let g be a simple Lie algebra. Let A = Uq (g) be the corresponding quantized enveloping
algebra, A0 be the dual of A with the opposite coproduct. Let R be the universal R-matrix of
A. Let V, W be finite-dimensional irreducible representations of Uq (g). Let L ∈ A ⊗ A0 be the
canonical element. Put
LV = (ρV

VW
⊗ id)L, R±
= (ρV ⊗ ρW )R± .

(4.29)

We may call LV ∈ EndV ⊗ A0 the universal quantum Lax operator (with auxiliary space V ).
Property (4.25) immediately implies that

V W −1
VW
.
(4.30)
L2W L1V = R+
L1V L2W R+

Proposition 4.18 The associative algebra Fq (G) generated by the matrix coefficients of LV
satisfying the commutation relations (4.30) and with the matrix coproduct
.

∆LV = LV ⊗ LV
is a quantization of the Poisson-Hopf algebra F (G) with the Poisson bracket (3.6) , (3.8) .

Quantum and Classical Integrable Systems

49

The dual algebra Fq (G∗ ) is described in the following way. Let again L ∈ A ⊗ A0 be the
canonical element. Put
TV ± = ( ρV ⊗ R± ) L ∈ EndV ⊗ A,
(4.31)
TV = TV + (id ⊗ S) TV − .
Proposition 4.19 (i) The matrix coefficients of TV ± satisfy the following commutation relations:
−1
±2
±2
TW
TV±1 = RV W TV±1 TW
RV W
,

(4.32)
−2 +1
V W +1 −2
V W −1
TW TV = R
TV TW R
.j
(ii) The associative algebra Fq (G∗ ) generated by the matrix coefficients of T ±V satisfying the
commutation relations (4.32) and with the matrix coproduct
.

∆T ±V = T ±V ⊗ T ±V
is a quantization of the Poisson-Hopf algebra F (G∗ ) with Poisson bracket (3.9), (3.12) .
(iii) TV = (id⊗F )LV . The matrix coefficients of TV satisfy the following commutation relations:


V W −1 2
VW 1
V W −1 2
VW
R+
TW R+
TV = TV1 R−
TW R−
.
(4.33)

(iv) The associative algebra generated by the matrix coefficients of TV satisfying the commutation relations (4.32) is a quantization of the Poisson-Hopf algebra F (G∗ ) with Poisson bracket
( 3.12).
(v) The pairing
VW
TV±1 , L2W = R+
sets the algebras Fq (G) , Fq (G∗ ) into duality as Hopf algebras.

Formulae (4.30, 4.32, 4.33) are the exact quantum analogues of the Poisson bracket relations
(3.8, 3.9, 3.12), respectively.
4.2.2. Quantum commutativity theorem and quantum Casimirs. In complete analogy
with the linear case the appropriate algebra of observables which is associated with quantum Lax
equations is not the quasitriangular Hopf algebra A but rather its dual A0 ; the Hamiltonians
arise from the Casimir elements of A. We may summarize this picture in the following heuristic
correspondence principle.
Quadratic Classical Case Quadratic Quantum case
F (G)
A0 = Uq (g∗ ) ≃ Fq (G)
∗
F (G )
A = Uq (g) ≃ Fq (G∗ )
Classical r-matrices
Quantum R-matrices
Casimir functions in F (G∗ ) Casimir operators Z ⊂ Uq (g)
Symplectic leaves in G
Irreducible representations of A0
∗
Symplectic leaves in G
Irreducible representations of A
According to this correspondence principle, in order to get a ‘quantum Lax system’ associated with a given factorizable Hopf algebra A we may proceed as follows:

50

M.A. Semenov-Tian-Shansky

– Choose a representation (π, V) of A0 .
– Choose a Casimir element ζ ∈ Z (A) and compute its inverse image F −1 (ζ) ∈ A0 with
respect to the factorization
map F : A0 → A.

– Put Hζ = π F −1 (ζ) .

Moreover, we expect that the eigenvectors of the quantum Hamiltonian Hζ can be expressed
as matrix coefficients of appropriate representations of A.
In order to describe quantum Casimirs explicitly we have to take into account the effect of
twisting. We shall start with their description in the finite-dimensional case. The results stated
below are the exact quantum counterparts of those described in section 3.2.2.
Let g be a finite-dimensional simple Lie algebra, A = Uq (g) the quantized universal enveloping algebra of g. We shall recall its standard definition in terms of the Chevalley generators
(Drinfeld (1987a), Jimbo (1986)). Let P be the set of simple roots of g. For αi ∈ P we set
qi = q hαi ,αi i . We denote the Cartan matrix of g. by Aij

Definition 4.4 Uq (g) is a free associative algebra with the generators ki , ki−1 , ei , fi i∈P and
relations
ki · ki−1 = ki−1 ki = 1, [ki , kj ] = 0,
−Aij

A

[ai , ej ] = qi ij ej , [ai , fj ] = qi
[ei , fj ] = δij

ej ,


ki2 − ki−2
qi2 − qi−2

and the following q-Serre relations:
1−Aij

X

n

(−1)

n=0
1−Aij

X

n=0

(Here

m

(−1)n






1 − Aij
1−A −n
ei ij ej eni = 0,
n
q2
i



1 − Aij
1−A −n
fi ij fj fin = 0.
n
q2
i

n q are the q-binomial coefficients.)

Theorem 4.20 (Drinfeld (1987a)) Uq (g) is a quasitriangular Hopf algebra.
As usual, we denote by R ∈ Uq (g)⊗Uq (g) its universal R-matrix and put RV W = (ρV ⊗ ρW ) R
We recall the following well known corollary of definition 4.4. Let H be the ‘Cartan subgroup’ generated by the elements ki , i ∈ P, C [H] its group algebra. We denote by Uq (n± ),
Uq (b± ) ⊂ Uq (g) the subalgebras generated by ei , fi (respectively, by ki , ei and by ki , fi ).
Proposition 4.21 (i) C [H] , Uq (n± ), Uq (b± ) are Hopf subalgebras in Uq (g).(ii) Uq (n± ) is a
two-sided Hopf ideal in Uq (b± ) and Uq (b± )/Uq (n± ) ≃ C [H] .

Quantum and Classical Integrable Systems

51

Let π± : Uq (b± ) → C [H] be the canonical projection. Consider the embedding
i : C [H] → C [H] ⊗ C [H] : a 7−→ (id ⊗ S) ∆a.
(Here ∆ is the coproduct in commutative and cocommutative Hopf algebra C [H] and S is its
antipode.)
Proposition 4.22 The dual of Uq (g) may be identified with the subalgebra
A0 = {x ∈ Uq (b+ ) ⊗ Uq (b− ); π+ ⊗ π− (x) ∈ i (C [H])} .
Lemma 4.23 For any h ∈ H, h ⊗ hR = Rh ⊗ h.
The algebra A admits a (trivial) family of deformations Ah = Uq (g)h , h ∈ H, defined by the
following prescription:
ei 7−→ hei , fi 7−→ hfi , ki 7−→ hki .

(4.34)

It is instructive to look at the commutation relations of Ah in the FRT realization. Let V, W ∈
±
RepA; we define the ‘generating matrices’ TV± ∈ A ⊗ EndV, TW
∈ A ⊗ EndW , as in (4.31).
Proposition 4.24 (i) The deformation (4.34) transforms TV± into ρV (h∓1 )TV± ; the commutation relations in the deformed algebra Ah amount to
±2
TV±1 = RV W TV±1 TV±2 RV W
TW
−1
−2 +1
−2
TW
TV = RhV W TV+1 TW
RV W
,

−1

,

(4.35)

where RhV W = ρV ⊗ ρW (Rh ) and Rh = h ⊗ h−1 Rh−1 ⊗ h.

−1
(ii) Put Th = ρV h2 TV+ TV−
; the ‘operator-valued matrix’ Th satisfies the following commutation relations


VW
V W −1 2
VW 1
V W −1 2
TW R−
.
(4.36)
TW R+
TV = TV1 R−
R+
Let LV ∈ A∗ ⊗ EndV be the ‘universal Lax operator’ introduced in (4.29). Fix h ∈ H and

put
lVh = trV ρV (h2 )LV .

(4.37)

Elements lVh ∈ A0 are usually called (twisted) transfer matrices. The following theorem is one
of the key results of QISM (as applied to the finite-dimensional case).
Theorem 4.25 For any representations V, W and for any h ∈ H ,
h
h
lVh lW
= lW
lVh .

(4.38)

52

M.A. Semenov-Tian-Shansky

The mutual commutativity of transfer matrices is a direct corollary of the commutation
relations (4.30); twisting by elements h ∈ H is compatible with these relations, since
(h ⊗ h) R = R (h ⊗ h) .
We want to establish a relation between the transfer matrices and the Casimirs of Uq (g)h′
(where h′ ∈ H may be different from h). To account for twisting we must slightly modify the
factorization map.
Let H ×A → A be the natural action of H on A by right translations, and let H ×A0 → A0
be the contragredient action. The algebra A = Uq (g) is factorizable; let F : A0 → A be the
isomorphism induced by the action (4.28); for h ∈ H put F h = F ◦ h. Let us compute the image

of the universal Lax operator LV ∈ EndV ⊗ A0 under the ‘factorization mapping’ id ⊗ F h ;
it is easy to see that


id ⊗ F h (LV ) := TVh± = id ⊗ h±1 TV1±
Put

clearly, we have thV

thV = trV TVh+ TVh−

= F (lVh ).

−1

= trV ρV (h)2 TV1 ;

(4.39)

Theorem 4.26 (i) (Faddeev, Reshetikhin and Takhtajan (1989)) Suppose that h = q −ρ , where
h
2ρ ∈ h is the sum of positive roots of
 g . Then all coefficients of tV are central in A = Uq (g) . (ii)
The center of A is generated by thV (with V ranging over all irreducible finite-dimensional
−1
representations of Uq (g)).(iii) For any s ∈ H we have lVs = F sh (thV ).
Theorem 4.26 is an exact analogue of theorem 4.1 for finite-dimensional factorizable quantum
groups. Its use is twofold: first, it provides us with commuting quantum Hamiltonians; second,
the eigenfunctions of these Hamiltonians may be constructed as appropriate matrix coefficients
(‘correlation functions’) of irreducible representations of Uq (g) . Again, to apply the theorem
to more interesting and realistic examples we must generalize it to the affine case.
4.2.3. Quantized affine Lie algebras. Two important classes of infinite-dimensional quasitriangular Hopf algebras are quantum affine Lie algebras and the full Yangians (that is, the
doubles of the Yangians defined in (Drinfeld (1987a))). For concreteness I shall consider only
the first class. To avoid technical difficulties we shall consider the simplest nontrivial case, that
of the affine sl2 .
d
The standard definition of Uq (sl
2 ) is by means of generators and relations:

 −1 
d
with generators ei , fi , Ki ,
Definition 4.5 Uq (sl
2 ) is a free associative algebra over C q, q
Ki−1 , i = 0, 1, which satisfy the following relations:
Ki Kj = Kj Ki ,

Ki ej = q Aij ej Ki , Ki fj = q −Aij fj Ki ,


[ei , fj ] = δij q − q −1 Ki − Ki−1 ,

(4.40)

Quantum and Classical Integrable Systems

53

where Aij is the Cartan matrix of the affine sl2 , A00 = A11 = −A01 = −A10 = 2. In addition
to (4.40) the following q-Serre relations are imposed:


e3i ej − 1 + q + q −1 e2i ej ei − ei ej e2i − ej e3i = 0,


fi3 fj − 1 + q + q −1 fi2 fj fi − fi fj fi2 − fj fi3 = 0.

(4.41)

d
The Hopf structure in Uq (sl
2 ) is defined by

∆Ki = Ki ⊗ Ki ,
∆ei = ei ⊗ 1 + Ki ⊗ ei ,

(4.42)

∆fi = fi ⊗ 1 + Ki ⊗ ei .
d
d
The element K0 K1 is central in Uq (sl
2 ); the quotient of Uq (sl2 ) over the relation
K0 K1 = q k , k ∈ Z,

d
is called the level k quantized universal enveloping algebra Uq (sl
2 )k .

d
An alternative realization of Uq (sl
2 )k is based on the explicit use of the quantum R-matrix;
in agreement with the quantum duality principle, this realization may be regarded as an explicit
quantization of the Poisson algebra of functions Fq (G∗ ), where G∗ is the Poisson dual of the
loop group L(SL2 ). The relevant Poisson structure on G∗ has to be twisted in so as to take into
account the central charge k; moreover, in complete analogy with the non-deformed case, the
d
center of Uq (sl
2 )k is nontrivial only for the critical value of the central charge kcrtit = −2. (The
critical value k = −2 is a specialization, for g = sl2 , of the general formula k = −h∨ ; thus the
value of kcrit is not affected by q-deformation.)
Introduce the R-matrix


1

0

0

0



z (q−q ) 

 0 1−z−1 q−zq−1 0 
R(z) =  q−zq
.
−1
1−z
 0 q−q −1
0
−1
−1

q−zq

q−zq

0

0

0

(4.43)

1

[) be an associative algebra with generators l± [n] , i, j = 1, 2, n ∈ ±Z + . In order to
Let Uq′ (gl
2 k
ij
[) we introduce the generating series L± (z) = l± (z) ,
describe commutation relations in U ′ (gl
q

2 k

±
lij
(z) =

ij

∞
X

n=0

±
lij
[±n] z ±n ;

(4.44)

54

M.A. Semenov-Tian-Shansky

±
+
−
we assume, moreover, that lij
[0] are upper (lower) triangular: lij
[0] = lji
[0] = 0 for i < j. The
[) are
defining relations in U ′ (gl
q

2 k

+
−
−
+
lii
[0] lii
[0] = lii
[0] lii
[0] = 1, i = 1, 2,
z
±
±
±
R
L±
,
(4.45)
1 (z) L2 (w) = L2 (w) L1 (z) R
 z w
w

z k
−
−
+
R
q −k L+
q
1 (z) L2 (w) = L2 (w) L1 (z) R
w
w
(we use again the standard tensor notation). Relations (4.45) are understood as relations between formal power series in wz . Observe the obvious parallels between (4.45) and (4.35): the
shift in the argument of R reflects the effects of the central extension; in the finite-dimensional
case this extension is of course trivial and the shift may be eliminated by a change of variables.
The commutation relations (4.45) are the exact quantum analogue of the Poisson bracket relations (3.26) with p = q k .

z

Lemma 4.27 The coefficients of the formal power series

 ±
−1 ±
±
±
±
(z) − l21
(z) l11
(z) l12
q det(L± (z)) := l11
(z)
zq 2 l22
d) .
are central in Uq′ (gl
2 k

d) over the relations q det(L± (z)) = 1 is isomorphic to
Theorem 4.28 The quotient of Uq′ (gl
2 k
d
Uq (sl
2) .
k

The accurate proof of this theorem (and of its generalization to arbitrary quantized affine Lie
algebras) is far from trivial (see Ding and Frenkel (1994)); it relies on a still another realization
of quantized affine Lie algebras, the so-called Drinfeld’s new realization (Drinfeld (1987b)); the
important point for us is that the realization described in theorem 4.28 is adapted to the explicit
description of the Casimir elements.
Let us put



−1
L (z) = L+ q −k/2 z L− zq k/2
(4.46)

(this is the so-called full quantum current)

Theorem 4.29 (Reshetikhin and Semenov-Tian-Shansky (1990)) (i) The quantum current
(4.46) satisfies the commutation relations
z
q −k/2 z
L1 (z)R−1 (
)L2 (w) =
(4.47)
R
w
w
 z −1
q k/2 z
.
L2 (w)R(
)L1 (z)R
w
w
(ii) Suppose that k = −2; then the coefficients of the formal series
t(z) = tr q 2ρ L (z)
d
are central elements in the algebra Uq (sl
2 )k .

(4.48)

Quantum and Classical Integrable Systems

55

As 
usual, ρstands for half the sum of positive roots. In the present setting we have simply
q 0
q 2ρ =
. The critical value k = −2 is a special case of the general formula k = −h∨
0 q −1
(the dual Coxeter number); thus the critical value remains the same as in the non-deformed
case.
The definition of the quantum current and formulae (4.47,4.48) are in fact quite general and
apply to arbitrary quantized loop algebras. There are all reasons to expect that the center of
the quotient algebra A−h∨ = A/(c + h∨ ) for the critical value of the central charge is generated
by (4.48) (with V ranging over all irreducible finite-dimensional representations of Uq (^g)) (cf.
(Ding and Etingof (1994), Frenkel (1995))).There are two main subtle points:
1. Our construction involved the 2-dimensional ‘evaluation representation’ Uq (sl2 ) →
EndC((z)). In the general case we must describe finite-dimensional representations V (z) of
Uq (g) with spectral parameter; this requires additional technical efforts.
2. In the sl2 case it was possible to use the generating series (4.44) as an exact alternative to
the Drinfeld-Jimbo definition; in the general case the analogues of relations (4.45) are still
valid but there may be others; anyway, the generating series L±
V (z) may be defined as the
image of the canonical element:

L±
V (z) = id ⊗ ρV (z) ◦ (R± ⊗ id)L;
the definition of the quantum current and theorem 4.29 are still valid.

We may now use theorem 4.29 to relate the elements of the center to quantum Hamiltonians. Our main pattern remains the same. For concreteness let us again assume that A =
0
0
d
Uq (sl
2 ). Let us take its dual A as the algebra of observables. Let L ∈ A ⊗ A be the canonical element. For any finite-dimensional sl2 -module V there is a natural representation of A
in V ((z)) (evaluation representation) Let W be another finite-dimensional sl2 -module. Put
LV (z) = (ρV (z) M ⊗ id)L, LW (z) = (ρW (z) ⊗ id)L, RV W (z) = (ρV (z) ⊗ ρW (z) )R. We may call
LV (z) ∈ EndV ((z)) ⊗ A0 the universal quantum Lax operator (with auxiliary space V ). Fix
a finite-dimensional representation π of A0 ; one can show that (id ⊗ π) LV (z) is rational in z.
(Moreover, Tarasov (1985) showed how to use this dependence on z to classify finite-dimensional
representations of A0 .) Property (4.25) immediately implies that
−1
V
VW
VW
LW
(vw−1 )LV1 (v)LW
(vw−1 )
.
2 (w)L1 (v) = R
2 (w) R

(4.49)

Moreover, RV W (z) satisfies the Yang-Baxter identity (4.24).
Let H be the Cartan subgroup of G. Fix h ∈ H and put lVh (v) = trV ρV (h2 )LV (v), then
h
h
h
lV (v)lW
(w) = lW
(w)lVh (v). Elements lVh (v) are called (twisted) transfer matrices.
It is convenient to extend A by adjoining to it group-like elements which correspond to the
^ = h ⊕ Cd in ^g. Let Ĥ = H × C∗ be the corresponding ‘extended
extended Cartan subalgebra h
Cartan subgroup’ in A generated by elements h = q λ , λ ∈ h, t = q kd . Let Ĥ × A → A be

56

M.A. Semenov-Tian-Shansky

its natural action on A by right translations, Ĥ × A0 → A0 the contragredient action. The
algebra A = Uq (^
g) is factorizable; let F : A0 → A be the isomorphism induced by the action
(4.28); for h ∈ Ĥ put F h = F ◦ h.


LhV (z)± = ( id ⊗ R± ◦ h) LV (z) ∈ EndV z ±1 ⊗ A,
(4.50)
LhV (z) = LhV (z)+ (id ⊗ S) LhV (z)− , h ∈ Ĥ;
it is easy to see that
and hence


LhV (z)± = id ⊗ h±1 L1V (z)±

TVh (z) = (id ⊗ h) TV1 (z) (id ⊗ h) ;
moreover, if h = s−1 t, where s ∈ H and t = q kd , we have also
TVh (z) = (ρV (s) ⊗ id) TVt (z) (ρV (s) ⊗ id) .
Put thV = trV TVh (z) = trV ρV (s)2 TVt (z); clearly, we have thV (z) = F t (lVs (z)). Let 2ρ be the sum
of positive roots of g = sl2 , h∨ = 2 its dual Coxeter number (our notation again hints at the
general case).
Theorem 4.30 (i) (Reshetikhin and Semenov-Tian-Shansky (1990)) Suppose that h =
∨
q −ρ q −h d . Then all coefficients of thV (z) are central in U. (ii) For any s ∈ H we have lVs (z) =
−1
F sh (thV (z)).
Thus the duality between Hamiltonians and Casimir operators holds for quantum affine
algebras as well. This allows to anticipate connections between the generalized Bethe Ansatz,
representation theory of quantum affine algebras at the critical level and the q-KZ equation
(Frenkel and Reshetikhin (1992), Smirnov (1992)). The results bearing on these connections are
already abundant (Ding and Etingof (1994), Tarasov and Varchenko (1994), Frenkel (1995)),
although they are still not in their final form.
As we have already observed in the classical context, the Hopf structure on A0 is perfectly
suited to the study of lattice systems. Let ∆(N ) : A0 → ⊗N A0 be the iterated coproduct
map. ⊗N A0 may be interpreted as the algebra of observables associated with a multiparticle
system. Put t̂hV (z) = ∆(N ) thV (z); Laurent coefficients of t̂hV (z) provide a commutative family of
Hamiltonians in ⊗N A0 . Let in : A0 → ⊗N A0 be the natural embedding, in : x 7→ 1 ⊗ ... ⊗ x ⊗
... ⊗ 1; put LnV = (id ⊗ in ) LV . Then
!
←
−
Y
n
h
(4.51)
t̂V (z) = trV ρV (h) LV .
n

Formula (4.51) has a natural interpretation in terms of lattice systems: LnV may be regarded
as ‘local’ Lax operators attached to the points of a periodic lattice Γ = Z/N Z; commuting
Q
←
− n
Hamiltonians for the big system arise from the monodromy matrix MV =
LV associated
with the lattice. Finally, the twist h ∈ H defines a quasiperiodic boundary condition on the

Quantum and Classical Integrable Systems

57

lattice. The study of the lattice system again breaks into two parts: (a) Find the joint spectrum of
l̂V (z). (b) Reconstruct the Heisenberg operators corresponding to ’local’ observables and compute
their correlation functions. This is the Quantum Inverse Problem (profound results on it are
due to Smirnov (1992).)

References
Adler M. (1979). On a trace functional for formal pseudodifferential operators and the symplectic
structure for the KdV type equations, Invent. Math. 50, 219-248.
Baxter R.J. (1982) Exactly Solved Models in Statistical Mechanics. Academic Press, London.
Belavin A.A., Drinfeld V.G. (1983). Triangle equations and simple Lie algebras, Sov. Sci. Rev., 4C,
93-165.
Babujian H.M., Flume R. (1993). Off-shell Bethe ansatz equations for Gaudin magnets and solutions
of KZ equations, Preprint Bonn-HE-93-30.
Bogolyubov N.M., Izergin A.G., Korepin V.E. (1994). Correlation Functions of Integrable Systems and
Quantum Inverse Scattering Method. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Bayen F., Flato M., Fronsdal C., Lichnerowicz A., Sternheimer D. (1977). Deformation theory and
quantization, I, II. Ann. Phys., 111, 61-151.
Cartier P. (1994). Some fundamental techniques in the theory of integrable systems, in: Lectures on
integrable systems, O. Babelon, P. Cartier, Y. Kosmann-Schwarzbach, eds. World Scientific.
Ding J., Etingof P. (1994). Center of a quantum affine algebra at the critical level. Math. Res. Lett. 1,
469-480.
Ding J,. Frenkel I. (1993). Commun. Math. Phys.156,277-300.
Dixmier J. (1974). Algèbres enveloppantes. Cahiers Scientifiques, fasc. XXXVII. Gauthier-Villars,
Paris.
Drinfeld V.G. (1983). Hamiltonian structures on Lie groups, Lie bialgebras and the geometric meaning
of the classsical Yang-Baxter equation. Sov. Math. Dokl., 27, 68-71.
Drinfeld V.G. (1987). Quantum Groups. Proc. ICM-86 (Berkeley), vol. 1, p. 798. AMS.
Drinfeld V.G. (1987). Sov. Math. Dokl., 36, 212-216.
Faddeev L.D. (1980). Quantum Completely Integrable Systems in Quantum Field Theory. Sov. Sci.
Rev.1C, 107-155.
Faddeev L.D. (1984). Integrable Models in (1+1)-dimensional Quantum Field Theory. Les Houches
1982. Elsevier Science Publ.
Faddeev L.D. (1995). Algebraic aspects of Bethe ansatz, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A10, 1845-1878, e-print
archive: hep-th/9404013.
Faddeev L.D., Reshetikhin N.Yu., Takhtajan L.A. (1989). Quantization of Lie groups and Lie algebras.
Leningrad Math. J., 1, 178-207.
Faddeev L.D., Takhtajan L.A. (1979). Quantum Inverse Scattering Method. Russian Math. Surveys,
34:5, 11-68.
Faddeev L.D., Takhtajan L.A. (1987). Hamiltonian Methods in the Theory of Solitons. Springer.
Faddeev L.D., Volkov A.Yu. (1993). Abelian current algebra and the Virasoro algebra on the lattice.
Phys. Lett. B315, 311-318.
Feigin B, Frenkel E. (1992). Affine Kac-Moody algebras at the critical level and Gelfand-Dikij algebras,
Int. J. Mod. Phys.A 7, Suppl. 1A, 197-215.

58

M.A. Semenov-Tian-Shansky

Feigin B., Frenkel E., and Reshetikhin N. (1994). Gaudin model, Bethe ansatz and correlation functions
at the critical level. Commun. Math.Phys, 166, 27-62.
Frenkel E. (1995). Affine algebras, Langlands duality and Bethe ansatz. Proc. International Congr. of
Math. Physics, Paris 1994. Paris, International Press, pp.606-642.
Frenkel I.B., Reshetikhin N.Yu. (1992). Quantum affine algebras and holonomic difference equations.
Commun. Math. Phys. 146, 1-60.
Gardner C.S., Greene J.M., Kruskal M.D., Miura R.M. (1967). Method for solving the KdV equation,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 19, 1095-1097.
Gaudin M. (1983). La Fonction d’Onde de Bethe. Masson, Paris.
Goodman R., and Wallach N.R. (1982). Classical and quantum-mechanical systems of Toda lattice
type. I. Commun. Math. Phys., 83, 355-386.
Goodman R., and Wallach N.R. (1984). Classical and quantum-mechanical systems of Toda lattice
type.II. Commun. Math. Phys., 94, 177-217
Harnad J., Winternitz P. (1993). Classical and quantum integrable systems in g̃l(2)+∗ and separation
of variables. Preprint CRM 1921, Montreal 1993.
Jimbo M. (1986). A q-difference analogue of U (g) and the Yang-Baxter equation. Lett. Math. Phys.
10, 62-69.
Jurčo B. (1989). Classical Yang-Baxter equation and quantum integrable systems. J. Math. Phys. 30,
1289-1293.
Kazhdan D., Kostant B., Sternberg S. (1978). Hamiltonian group actions and dynamical systems of
Calogero type. Commun. Pure Appl. Math. 31, 481-508.
Kirillov A.A. (1976). Elements of representation theory. Springer Verlag. Berlin a.o.
Kirillov A.N., Reshetikhin N.Yu. (1990). q-Weyl group and a multiplicative formula for the universal
R-matrix, Commun. Math. Phys. 134, 421- 431
Kostant B. (1978). On Whittaker vectors and representation theory, Inventiones Math. 48, 101-184.
Kostant B. (1979). Quantization and Representation Theory, in: Representation Theory of Lie Groups,
Proc. SRC/LMS Res. Symp., Oxford 1977. London Math. Soc. Lecture Notes Series, 34, 287-316,
1979.
Kulish P.P., Sklyanin E.K. (1981). Quantum Spectral Transform Method. In: Integrable Quantum Field
Theories. Lecture Notes in Physics 151, 61-119, Springer.
Kuznetsov V. (1994). Equivalence of two graphical calculi. J.Phys. A25, 6005-6026.
Lax P.D. (1968). Integrals of nonlinear equations and solitary waves. Commun. Pure Appl. Math., 21,
467-490.
Olshanetsky M.A., Perelomov A.M. (1994). Integrable systems and finite-dimensional Lie algebras, in:
Encyclopaedia of Math. Sciences, vol. 16. Springer-Verlag, Berlin a.o.
Reshetikhin N.Yu., Semenov-Tian-Shansky M.A. (1990). Central extensions of quantum current groups.
Lett. Math. Phys. 19, 133-142 (1990).
Reshetikhin N.Yu., Semenov-Tian-Shansky M.A. (1991). Quantum R-matrices and factorization problems, in: Geometry and Physics, essays in honour of I.M.Gelfand, S.Gindikin and I.M.Singer, eds.
North Holland, Amsterdam - London - New York, 1991, pp. 533-550.
Reshetikhin N., Varchenko A. (1993). Quasiclassical asymptotics of the KZ equations. Preprint.
Reyman A.G. (1996). Poisson structures related to quantum groups, in: International School of Physics
“E. Fermi”, Course 127, Varenna, 1994. Quantum Groups and their Applications in Physics, L.
Castellani and J. Wess, eds. Amsterdam, 1996.

Quantum and Classical Integrable Systems

59

Reyman A.G., Semenov-Tian-Shansky M.A. (1994). Group-theoretical methods in the theory of finitedimensional integrable systems, in: Encyclopaedia of Math. Sciences, vol. 16. Springer-Verlag, Berlin
a.o.
Semenov-Tian-Shansky M.A. (1983). What is the classical r-matrix. Funct Anal. Appl. 17, 259-272.
Semenov-Tian-Shansky M.A. (1994a) Quantization of open Toda lattice, in: Encyclopaedia of Math.
Sciences, vol. 16. Springer-Verlag, Berlin a.o. 1994.
Semenov-Tian-Shansky M.A. (1994b). Lectures on r-matrices, Poisson Lie groups and integrable systems, in: Lectures on integrable systems, O. Babelon, P. Cartier, Y. Kosmann-Schwarzbach, eds.
World Scientific, 1994.
Semenov-Tian-Shansky M.A. (1994c). Poisson Lie groups, quantum duality principle and the quantum
double. Contemporary Math., 175, 219-248.
Sklyanin E.K. (1979) On complete integrability of the Landau-Lifshitz equation. Preprint LOMI E-3-79,
Leningrad, 1979.
Sklyanin E.K. (1992). Quantum Inverse Scattering Method. Selected Topics, in: Quantum Groups and
Quantum Integrable Systems. Ge M.L., ed. World Scientific, Singapore, 1992.
Sklyanin E.K. (1995). Separation of variables. New trends, in: QFT, Integrable Models and beyond, T.
Inami and R. Sasaki, eds. Progr. Theor. Phys. Suppl.118, 35-60.
Sklyanin E.K., Takhtajan L.A., Faddeev L.D. (1979). The quantum inverse scattering method. I. Theor.
Math. Phys. 101, 194-220.
Smirnov F.A. (1992). Form Factors in Completely Integrable Models of Quantum Field Theory. Adv.
Series in Math. Phys. 14. World Scientific, Singapore.
Tarasov V.O. (1985). Irreducible monodromy matrices for the R-matrix of the XXZ-model and lattice
local quantum Hamiltonians. Theor. Math. Phys. 63, 440-454.
Tarasov V.O., Varchenko A. (1994). Jackson integral representations for solutions of the quantized KZ
equation. St. Petersburg Math. J. 6, no 2.
Weinstein A. (1994). Deformation quantization. Seminaire Bourbaki, exposé no 789.

