This page intentionally left blank

OXFORD MASTER SERIES IN STATISTICAL, COMPUTATIONAL, AND THEORETICAL
PHYSICS

OXFORD MASTER SERIES IN PHYSICS
The Oxford Master Series is designed for final year undergraduate and beginning graduate students in physics and
related disciplines. It has been driven by a perceived gap in the literature today. While basic undergraduate physics texts
often show little or no connection with the huge explosion of research over the last two decades, more advanced and
specialized texts tend to be rather daunting for students. In this series, all topics and their consequences are treated at a
simple level, while pointers to recent developments are provided at various stages. The emphasis in on clear physical
principles like symmetry, quantum mechanics, and electromagnetism which underlie the whole of physics. At the same
time, the subjects are related to real measurements and to the experimental techniques and devices currently used by
physicists in academe and industry. Books in this series are written as course books, and include ample tutorial material,
examples, illustrations, revision points, and problem sets. They can likewise be used as preparation for students starting
a doctorate in physics and related fields, or for recent graduates starting research in one of these fields in industry.
CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS

1. M. T. Dove: Structure and dynamics: an atomic view of materials
2. J. Singleton: Band theory and electronic properties of solids
3. A. M. Fox: Optical properties of solids
4. S. J. Blundell: Magnetism in condensed matter
5. J. F. Annett: Superconductivity
6. R. A. L. Jones: Soft condensed matter
ATOMIC, OPTICAL, AND LASER PHYSICS

7. C. J. Foot: Atomic physics
8. G. A. Brooker: Modern classical optics
9. S. M. Hooker, C. E. Webb: Laser physics
PARTICLE PHYSICS, ASTROPHYSICS, AND COSMOLOGY

10. D. H. Perkins: Particle astrophysics
11. Ta-Pei Cheng: Relativity, gravitation, and cosmology
STATISTICAL, COMPUTATIONAL, AND THEORETICAL PHYSICS

12. M. Maggiore: A modern introduction to quantum field theory
13. W. Krauth: Statistical mechanics: algorithms and computations
14. J. P. Sethna: Entropy, order parameters, and complexity

A Modern Introduction to Quantum
Field Theory

Michele Maggiore
Département de Physique Théorique
Université de Genève

1

3

Great Clarendon Street, Oxford OX2 6DP
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford.
It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship,
and education by publishing worldwide in
Oxford New York
Auckland Bangkok Buenos Aires Cape Town Chennai
Dar es Salaam Delhi Hong Kong Istanbul Karachi Kolkata
Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Mumbai Nairobi
São Paulo Shanghai Taipei Tokyo Toronto
Oxford is a registered trade mark of Oxford University Press
in the UK and in certain other countries
Published in the United States
by Oxford University Press Inc., New York
c Oxford University Press 2005

The moral rights of the author have been asserted
Database right Oxford University Press (maker)
First published 2005
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
without the prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press,
or as expressly permitted by law, or under terms agreed with the appropriate
reprographics rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction
outside the scope of the above should be sent to the Rights Department,
Oxford University Press, at the address above
You must not circulate this book in any other binding or cover
and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer
A catalogue record for this title is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
(Data available)
ISBN 0 19 852073 5 (Hbk)
ISBN 0 19 852074 3 (Pbk)
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Printed in Great Britain
on acid-free paper by Antony Rowe, Chippenham

A Maura, Sara e Ilaria

This page intentionally left blank

Contents
Preface

xi

Notation

xii

1 Introduction
1.1 Overview
1.2 Typical scales in high-energy physics
Further reading
Exercises

1
1
4
11
12

2 Lorentz and Poincaré symmetries in QFT
2.1 Lie groups
2.2 The Lorentz group
2.3 The Lorentz algebra
2.4 Tensor representations
2.4.1 Decomposition of Lorentz tensors under SO(3)
2.5 Spinorial representations
2.5.1 Spinors in non-relativistic quantum mechanics
2.5.2 Spinors in the relativistic theory
2.6 Field representations
2.6.1 Scalar ﬁelds
2.6.2 Weyl ﬁelds
2.6.3 Dirac ﬁelds
2.6.4 Majorana ﬁelds
2.6.5 Vector ﬁelds
2.7 The Poincaré group
2.7.1 Representation on ﬁelds
2.7.2 Representation on one-particle states
Summary of chapter
Further reading
Exercises

13
13
16
18
20
22
24
24
26
29
29
31
32
33
34
34
35
36
40
41
41

3 Classical ﬁeld theory
3.1 The action principle
3.2 Noether’s theorem
3.2.1 The energy–momentum tensor
3.3 Scalar ﬁelds
3.3.1 Real scalar ﬁelds; Klein–Gordon equation
3.3.2 Complex scalar ﬁeld; U (1) charge

43
43
46
49
51
51
53

viii Contents

3.4

Spinor ﬁelds
3.4.1 The Weyl equation; helicity
3.4.2 The Dirac equation
3.4.3 Chiral symmetry
3.4.4 Majorana mass
3.5 The electromagnetic ﬁeld
3.5.1 Covariant form of the free Maxwell equations
3.5.2 Gauge invariance; radiation and Lorentz gauges
3.5.3 The energy–momentum tensor
3.5.4 Minimal and non-minimal coupling to matter
3.6 First quantization of relativistic wave equations
3.7 Solved problems
The ﬁne structure of the hydrogen atom
Relativistic energy levels in a magnetic ﬁeld
Summary of chapter
Exercises

54
54
56
62
63
65
65
66
67
69
73
74
74
79
80
81

4 Quantization of free ﬁelds
4.1 Scalar ﬁelds
4.1.1 Real scalar ﬁelds. Fock space
4.1.2 Complex scalar ﬁeld; antiparticles
4.2 Spin 1/2 ﬁelds
4.2.1 Dirac ﬁeld
4.2.2 Massless Weyl ﬁeld
4.2.3
C, P, T
4.3 Electromagnetic ﬁeld
4.3.1 Quantization in the radiation gauge
4.3.2 Covariant quantization
Summary of chapter
Exercises

83
83
83
86
88
88
90
91
96
96
101
105
106

5 Perturbation theory and Feynman diagrams
5.1 The S-matrix
5.2 The LSZ reduction formula
5.3 Setting up the perturbative expansion
5.4 The Feynman propagator
5.5 Wick’s theorem and Feynman diagrams
5.5.1 A few very explicit computations
5.5.2 Loops and divergences
5.5.3 Summary of Feynman rules for a scalar ﬁeld
5.5.4 Feynman rules for fermions and gauge bosons
5.6 Renormalization
5.7 Vacuum energy and the cosmological constant problem
5.8 The modern point of view on renormalizability
5.9 The running of coupling constants
Summary of chapter
Further reading
Exercises

109
109
111
116
120
122
123
128
131
132
135
141
144
146
152
153
154

Contents ix

6 Cross-sections and decay rates
155
6.1 Relativistic and non-relativistic normalizations
155
6.2 Decay rates
156
6.3 Cross-sections
158
6.4 Two-body ﬁnal states
160
6.5 Resonances and the Breit–Wigner distribution
163
6.6 Born approximation and non-relativistic scattering
167
6.7 Solved problems
171
Three-body kinematics and phase space
171
Inelastic scattering of non-relativistic electrons on atoms 173
Summary of chapter
177
Further reading
178
Exercises
178
7 Quantum electrodynamics
7.1 The QED Lagrangian
7.2 One-loop divergences
7.3 Solved problems
e+ e− → γ → µ+ µ−
Electromagnetic form factors
Summary of chapter
Further reading
Exercises

180
180
183
186
186
188
193
193
193

8 The low-energy limit of the electroweak theory
8.1 A four-fermion model
8.2 Charged and neutral currents in the Standard Model
8.3 Solved problems: weak decays
µ− → e− ν̄e νµ
π + → l+ νl
Isospin and ﬂavor SU (3)
K 0 → π − l+ νl
Summary of chapter
Further reading
Exercises

195
195
197
202
202
205
209
212
216
217
217

9 Path integral quantization
9.1 Path integral formulation of quantum mechanics
9.2 Path integral quantization of scalar ﬁelds
9.3 Perturbative evaluation of the path integral
9.4 Euclidean formulation
9.5 QFT and critical phenomena
9.6 QFT at ﬁnite temperature
9.7 Solved problems
Instantons and tunneling
Summary of chapter
Further reading

219
220
224
225
228
231
238
239
239
241
242

x Contents

10 Non-abelian gauge theories
10.1 Non-abelian gauge transformations
10.2 Yang–Mills theory
10.3 QCD
10.4 Fields in the adjoint representation
Summary of chapter
Further reading

243
243
246
248
250
252
252

11 Spontaneous symmetry breaking
11.1 Degenerate vacua in QM and QFT
11.2 SSB of global symmetries and Goldstone bosons
11.3 Abelian gauge theories: SSB and superconductivity
11.4 Non-abelian gauge theories: the masses of W ± and Z 0
Summary of chapter
Further reading

253
253
256
259
262
264
265

12 Solutions to exercises
12.1 Chapter 1
12.2 Chapter 2
12.3 Chapter 3
12.4 Chapter 4
12.5 Chapter 5
12.6 Chapter 6
12.7 Chapter 7
12.8 Chapter 8

266
266
267
270
272
275
276
279
281

Bibliography

285

Index

287

Preface
This book grew out of the notes of the course on quantum ﬁeld theory
that I give at the University of Geneva, for students in the fourth year.
Most courses on quantum ﬁeld theory focus on teaching the student
how to compute cross-sections and decay rates in particle physics. This
is, and will remain, an important part of the preparation of a highenergy physicist. However, the importance and the beauty of modern
quantum ﬁeld theory resides also in the great power and variety of its
methods and ideas. These methods are of great generality and provide a
unifying language that one can apply to domains as diﬀerent as particle
physics, cosmology, condensed matter, statistical mechanics and critical
phenomena. It is this power and generality that makes quantum ﬁeld
theory a fundamental tool for any theoretical physicist, independently
of his/her domain of specialization, as well as, of course, for particle
physics experimentalists.
In spite of the existence of many textbooks on quantum ﬁeld theory, I
decided to write these notes because I think that it is diﬃcult to ﬁnd a
book that has a modern approach to quantum ﬁeld theory, in the sense
outlined above, and at the same time is written having in mind the level
of fourth year students, which are being exposed for the ﬁrst time to the
subject.
The book is self-contained and can be covered in a two semester course,
possibly skipping some of the more advanced topics. Indeed, my aim is
to propose a selection of topics that can really be covered in a course,
but in which the students are introduced to many modern developments
of quantum ﬁeld theory.
At the end of some chapters there is a Solved Problems section where
some especially instructive computations are presented in great detail,
in order to give a model of how one really performs non-trivial computations. More exercises, sometimes quite demanding, are provided
for Chapters 1 to 8, and their solutions are discussed at the end of the
book. Chapters 9, 10 and 11 are meant as a bridge toward more advanced courses at the PhD level.
A few parts which are more technical and can be skipped at a ﬁrst
reading are written in smaller characters.

Acknowledgments. I am very grateful to Stefano Foﬀa, Florian Dubath, Alice Gasparini, Alberto Nicolis and Riccardo Sturani for their
help and for their careful reading of the manuscript. I also thank JeanPierre Eckmann for useful comments, and Sonke Adlung, of Oxford University Press, for his friendly and useful advice.

Notation
Our notation is the same as Peskin and Schroeder (1995). We use units
 = c = 1; their meaning and usefulness is illustrated in Section 1.2.
The metric signature is
ηµν = (+, −, −, −) .

1
We will never use lower spatial indices,
to avoid the possible ambiguity due to
the fact that in equations with only spatial indices it would be natural to use
δij to raise and lower them, while with
our signature it is rather ηij = −δij .

Indices. Greek indices take values µ = 0, . . . , 3, while spatial indices
are denoted by Latin letters, i, j, . . . = 1, 2, 3. The totally antisymmetric tensor µνρσ has 0123 = +1 (therefore 0123 = −1). Observe
that, e.g. 1230 = −1 since, to recover the reference sequence 0123,
the index zero has to jump three positions. Therefore µνρσ is anticyclic. Repeated
upper and lower Lorentz indices are summed over, e.g.

Aµ B µ ≡ 3µ=0 Aµ B µ . When the equations contain only spatial indices,
we will keep all indices as upper indices,1 and we will sum over repeated
upper indices; e.g. the angular momentum commutation relations are
written as [J k , J l ] = iklm J m , and the totally antisymmetric tensor ijk
is normalized as 123 = +1. The notation A denotes a spatial vector
whose components have upper indices, A = (A1 , A2 , A3 ).
The partial derivative is denoted by ∂µ = ∂/∂xµ and the (ﬂat space)
d’Alambertian is 2 = ∂µ ∂ µ = ∂02 − ∇2 . With our choice of signature the
four-momentum operator is represented on functions of the coordinates
as pµ = +i∂ µ , so p0 = i∂/∂x0 = i∂/∂t and pi = i∂ i = −i∂i = −i∂/∂xi .
Therefore pi = −i∇i with ∇i = ∂/∂xi = ∂i or, in vector notation,
p = −i∇ and ∇ = ∂/∂x .
↔

↔

The symbol ∂µ is deﬁned by f ∂µ g = f ∂µ g − (∂µ f )g. We also use the
Feynman slash notation: for a four-vector Aµ , we deﬁne A = Aµ γ µ . In
particular,  ∂ = γ µ ∂µ .
Dirac matrices. Dirac γ matrices satisfy
{γ µ , γ ν } ≡ γ µ γ ν + γ ν γ µ = 2η µν .
Therefore γ02 = 1 and, for each i, (γ i )2 = −1; γ 0 is hermitian while, for
each i, γ i is antihermitian,
(γ 0 )† = γ 0 ,

(γ i )† = −γ i ,

or, more compactly, (γ µ )† = γ 0 γ µ γ 0 . The matrix γ 5 is deﬁned as
γ 5 = +iγ 0 γ 1 γ 2 γ 3 ,
and satisﬁes
(γ 5 )2 = 1 ,

(γ 5 )† = γ 5 ,

{γ 5 , γ µ } = 0 .

xiii

We also deﬁne

i µ ν
[γ , γ ] .
2
Two particularly useful representations of the γ matrix algebra are






0 1
0
σi
−1 0
5
γ0 =
,
γi =
=
,
γ
1 0
0 1
−σ i 0
σ µν =

(here 1 denotes the 2 × 2 identity matrix), which is called the chiral or
Weyl representation, and






1 0
0
σi
0 1
0
i
5
γ =
,
γ =
,
,
γ =
0 −1
1 0
−σ i 0
which is called the ordinary, or standard, representation.
The Pauli matrices are





0 1
0 −i
1
σ1 =
,
σ2 =
,
σ3 =
1 0
i 0
0

0
−1


,

and satisfy
σ i σ j = δ ij + iijk σ k .
We also deﬁne
σ µ = (1, σ i ) ,

σ̄ µ = (1, −σ i ) .

In the calculation of cross-sections and decay rates we often need the
following traces of products of γ matrices,
Tr(γ µ γ ν ) = 4 η µν ,
Tr(γ µ γ ν γ ρ γ σ ) = 4 (η µν η ρσ − η µρ η νσ + η µσ η νρ ) ,
Tr(γ 5 γ µ γ ν γ ρ γ σ ) = −4iµνρσ .
Fourier transform. The four-dimensional Fourier transform is

d4 k −ikx ˜
f(k) ,
e
f (x) =
(2π)4

˜ = d4 x eikx f (x) ,
f(k)
and, because of our choice of signature, the three-dimensional Fourier
transform is deﬁned as

d3 k +ik ·x ˜
f (x ) =
e
f (k ) ,
(2π)3

f˜(k ) = d3 x e−ik ·x f (x ) .
For arbitrary n, the n-dimensional Dirac delta satisﬁes

dn x eikx = (2π)n δ (n) (k) .

xiv Notation

Electromagnetism. The electron charge is denoted by e, and e < 0.
As is customary in quantum ﬁeld theory and particle physics, we use
the Heaviside–Lorentz system of units for electromagnetism (also called
rationalized Gaussian c.g.s. units). This means that the ﬁne structure
constant α = 1/137.035 999 11(46) is related to the electron charge by
α=

e2
,
4πc

or simply α = e2 /(4π) when we set  = c = 1. With this deﬁnition of
the unit of charge there is no factor of 4π in the Maxwell equations,
∇·E = ρ ,

∇×B − ∂0 E = J ,

while the Coulomb potential between two static particles of charges Q 1 =
q1 e and Q2 = q2 e is
V (r) =

Q1 Q2
α
= q1 q2
4πr
r

(1)

(where in the last equality we have used  = c = 1), and the energy
density of the electromagnetic ﬁeld is
ε=

2
Observe that, once the result is written in terms of α, it is independent of
the conventions on e, since α is always
the same constant  1/137. For instance, the Coulomb potential between
two electrons (in units  = c = 1) is
always V (r) = α/r.

1 2
(E + B2 ) .
2

In quantum electrodynamics nowadays these conventions on the electric charge are almost universally used, but it is useful to remark that
they diﬀer from the (unrationalized ) Gaussian units commonly used in
classical electrodynamics; see, e.g. Jackson (1975) or Landau and Lifshitz, vol. II (1979), where the electron charge is rather
√ deﬁned so that
α = e2unrat /(c)  1/137, and therefore eunrat = e/ 4π. The unrationalized electric and magnetic ﬁelds, Eunrat , Bunrat by deﬁnition are
related
to the rationalized
electric and √
magnetic ﬁelds, E, B by Eunrat =
√
√
4π E, Bunrat = 4π B, i.e. Aµunrat = 4π Aµ . The form of the Lorentz
force equation is therefore unchanged, since with these deﬁnitions eE =
eunrat Eunrat and eB = eunrat Bunrat . However, a factor 4π appears in the
Maxwell equations, ∇·Eunrat = 4πρunrat and ∇×Bunrat − ∂0 Eunrat =
4πJunrat ; the Coulomb potential becomes V (r) = (Q1 Q2 )unrat /r, and
the electromagnetic energy density becomes ε = (E2unrat + B2unrat )/(8π).
In quantum electrodynamics, since eAµ = eunrat Aµunrat , the interaction
vertex is −ieγ µ in rationalized units and −ieunrat γ µ in unrationalized
units. However, in unrationalized units the gauge ﬁeld is not canonically
normalized, as we see for instance from the form of the energy density.
Therefore in unrationalized units the √
factor associated to an incoming
photon in a Feynman √
graph becomes 4πµ rather than just µ , to an
outgoing photon it is 4π∗µ rather than just ∗µ , and in the photon
propagator the factor 1/k 2 becomes 4π/k 2 . In quantum theory it is more
convenient to have a canonically normalized gauge ﬁeld, which is the
reason why, except in Landau and Lifshitz, vol. IV (1982), rationalized
units are always used.2

xv

Experimental data. Unless explicitly speciﬁed otherwise, our experimental data are taken from the 2004 edition of the Review of Particle
Physics of the Particle Data Group, S. Eidelman et al., Phys. Lett.
B592, 1 (2004), also available on-line at http://pdg.lbl.gov.

This page intentionally left blank

1

Introduction
1.1

Overview

Quantum ﬁeld theory is a synthesis of quantum mechanics and special
relativity, and it is one of the great achievements of modern physics.
Quantum mechanics, as formulated by Bohr, Heisenberg, Schrödinger,
Pauli, Dirac, and many others, is an intrinsically non-relativistic theory.
To make it consistent with special relativity, the real problem is not
to ﬁnd a relativistic generalization of the Schrödinger equation.1 Wave
equations, relativistic or not, cannot account for processes in which the
number and the type of particles changes, as in almost all reactions of
nuclear and particle physics. Even the process of an atomic transition
from an excited atomic state A∗ to a state A with emission of a photon,
A∗ → A + γ, is in principle unaccessible to this treatment (although in
this case, describing the electromagnetic ﬁeld classically and the atom
quantum mechanically, one can get some correct results, even if in a
not very convincing manner). Furthermore, relativistic wave equations
suﬀer from a number of pathologies, like negative-energy solutions.
A proper resolution of these diﬃculties implies a change of viewpoint,
from wave equations, where one quantizes a single particle in an external classical potential, to quantum ﬁeld theory, where one identiﬁes the
particles with the modes of a ﬁeld, and quantizes the ﬁeld itself. The
procedure also goes under the name of second quantization.
The methods of quantum ﬁeld theory (QFT) have great generality
and ﬂexibility and are not restricted to the domain of particle physics.
In a sense, ﬁeld theory is a universal language, and it permeates many
branches of modern research. In general, ﬁeld theory is the correct language whenever we face collective phenomena, involving a large number
of degrees of freedom, and this is the underlying reason for its unifying
power. For example, in condensed matter the excitations in a solid are
quanta of ﬁelds, and can be studied with ﬁeld theoretical methods. An
especially interesting example of the unifying power of QFT is given
by the phenomenon of superconductivity which, expressed in the ﬁeld
theory language, turns out to be conceptually the same as the Higgs
mechanism in particle physics. As another example we can mention
that the Feynman path integral, which is a basic tool of modern quantum ﬁeld theory, provides a formal analogy between ﬁeld theory and
statistical mechanics, which has stimulated very important exchanges
between these two areas. Beside playing a crucial role for physicists,

1.1 Overview

1

1.2 Typical scales in
high-energy physics

4

1
Actually, Schrödinger ﬁrst found a
relativistic equation, that today we
call the Klein–Gordon equation. He
then discarded it because it gave the
wrong ﬁne structure for the hydrogen
atom, and he retained only the nonrelativistic limit. See Weinberg (1995),
page 4.

2 Introduction

quantum ﬁeld theory even plays a role in pure mathematics, and in the
last 20 years the physicists’ intuition stemming in particular from the
path integral formulation of QFT has been at the basis of striking and
unexpected advances in pure mathematics.
QFT obtains its most spectacular successes when the interaction is
small and can be treated perturbatively. In quantum electrodynamics
(QED) the theory can be treated order by order in the ﬁne structure
constant α = e2 /(4πc)  1/137. Given the smallness of this parameter, a perturbative treatment is adequate in almost all situations, and
the agreement between theoretical predictions and experiments can be
truly spectacular. For example, the electron has a magnetic moment of
modulus g|e|/(4me c), where g is called the gyromagnetic ratio. While
classical electrodynamics erroneously suggests g = 1, the Dirac equation
gives g = 2, and QED predicts a small deviation from this value; the
experimentally measured value is


g − 2 
= 0.001 159 652 187(4)
(1.1)

2
exp
(the digit in parentheses is the experimental error on the last ﬁgure),
and the theoretical prediction, computed perturbatively up to order α4 ,
is


 α 2
 α 3
g − 2 
α
− (0.328 478 965 . . .)
=
+ (1.176 11 . . . )

2
2π
π
π
th
 α 4
−(1.434 . . .)
= 0.001 159 652 140(5)(4)(27) .
π

2

See http://www.g-2.bnl.gov/. This
values updates the value reported in the
2004 edition of the Review of Particle
Physics.

Diﬀerent sources of errors on the last ﬁgures are written separately in
parentheses. The theoretical error is due partly to the numerical evaluation of Feynman diagrams (there are 891 of them at order α4 !) and
partly to the fact that, at this level of precision, hadronic contributions
come into play. We also need to know α with suﬃcient accuracy; this is
provided by the quantum Hall eﬀect.
The gyromagnetic ratio has been measured very precisely also for
the muon, and the accuracy of this measurement has been improved
recently,2 with the result (g − 2)/2|exp = 0.001 165 9208(6), and a theoretical prediction (g − 2)/2|th = 0.001 165 9181(7). The remaining discrepancy has aroused much interest, in the hope that it might be a signal
of new physical eﬀects, but to see whether this is actually the case requires ﬁrst a better theoretical understanding of hadronic contributions,
which are more diﬃcult to compute. In any case, an agreement between
theory and experiment at the level of 10 decimal ﬁgures for the electron
(or eight for the muon) is spectacular, and it is among the most precise
in physics.
As we know today, QED is only a part of a larger theory. As we
approach the scales of nuclear physics, i.e. length scales r ∼ 10−13 cm

1.1

or energies E ∼ 200 MeV, the existence of new interactions becomes
evident: strong interactions are responsible for instance for binding together neutrons and protons into nuclei, and weak interactions are responsible for a number of decays, like the beta decay of the neutron
into the proton, electron and antineutrino, n → pe− ν̄e . A successful
theory of beta decay was already proposed by Fermi in 1934. We now
understand the Fermi theory as a low energy approximation to a more
complete theory, that uniﬁes the weak and electromagnetic interactions
into a single conceptual framework, the electroweak theory. This theory,
developed in the early 1970s, together with the fundamental theory of
strong interactions, quantum chromodynamics (QCD), has such spectacular experimental successes that it now goes under the name of the
Standard Model. In the last decade of the 20th century the LEP machine at CERN performed a large number of precision measurements, at
the level of one part in 104 , which are all completely reproduced by the
theoretical predictions of the Standard Model. These results show that
we do understand the laws of Nature down to the scale of 10−17 cm,
i.e. four orders of magnitude below the size of a nucleus and nine orders
of magnitude below the size of an atom. Part of the activity of high
energy physicists nowadays is devoted to the search of physics beyond
the Standard Model. The best hint for new physics presently comes
from the recent experimental evidence for neutrino oscillations. These
oscillations imply that neutrinos have a very small mass, whose deeper
origin is suspected to be related to physics beyond the Standard Model.
The Standard Model has a beautiful theoretical structure; its discovery and development, due among others to Glashow, Weinberg, Salam
and ’t Hooft, requires a number of new concepts compared to QED.
A detailed explanation of the Standard Model is beyond the scope of
this course, but we will discuss two of its main ingredients: non-abelian
gauge ﬁelds, or Yang–Mills theories, and spontaneous symmetry breaking through the Higgs mechanism.
In spite of the remarkable successes of the Standard Model, the search
for the fundamental laws governing the microscopic world is still very
far from being completed. In the Standard Model itself there is still
a missing piece, since it predicts a particle, the Higgs boson, which
plays a crucial role and which has not yet been observed. LEP, after 11
years of glorious activity, was closed in November 2000, after reaching a
maximum center of mass energy of 209 GeV. The new machine, LHC,
is now under construction at CERN, and together with the Tevatron
collider at Fermilab aims at exploring the TeV (= 103 GeV = 1012 eV)
energy range. It is hoped that they will ﬁnd the Higgs boson and that
they will test theoretical ideas like supersymmetry that, if correct, are
expected to give observable signals at this energy scale.
Looking much beyond the Standard Model, there is a very substantial
reason for believing that we are still far from a true understanding of the
fundamental laws of Nature. This is because gravity cannot be included
in the conceptual schemes that we have discussed so far. General rela-

Overview 3

4 Introduction

3

However, this could change in theories
with large extra dimensions. In fact,
both in quantum ﬁeld theory and in
string theory, have been devised mechanisms such that some extra dimensions are accessible only to gravitational interactions, and not to electromagnetic, weak or strong interactions.
In this case, it turns out that the extra dimensions could even be as large
as the millimeter without conﬂicting
with any experimental result, and the
huge value 1019 GeV of the gravitational scale would emerge from a combination of the large volume of the extra
dimensions and a much smaller massscale which characterizes the energy
where genuine quantum gravity eﬀects
set in. This new gravitational massscale might even be as low as a few
tens of TeV, and in this case it could
be within the reach of future particle
physics experiments.

tivity is incompatible with quantum ﬁeld theory. From an experimental
point of view, at present, this causes no real worry; the energy scale
at which quantum gravity eﬀects are expected to become important is
so huge (of order 1019 GeV) that we can forget them altogether in accelerator experiments.3 There remains the conceptual need for a new
theoretical scheme where these two pillars of modern physics, quantum
ﬁeld theory and general relativity, merge consistently. And, of course,
one should also be subtle enough to ﬁnd situations where this can give
testable predictions. A consistent theoretical scheme is perhaps slowly
emerging in the form of string theory; but this would lead us very far
from the scope of this course.

1.2

Typical scales in high-energy physics

Before entering into the technical aspects of quantum ﬁeld theory, it
is important to have a physical understanding of the typical scales of
atomic and particle physics and to be able to estimate what are the
orders of magnitudes involved. Often this can be done just with elementary dimensional considerations, supplemented by some very basic
physical inputs. We will therefore devote this section to an overview of
order of magnitude estimates in particle physics.
These estimates are much simpliﬁed by the use of units  = c = 1. To
understand the meaning of these units, observe ﬁrst of all that  and c
are universal constants, i.e. they have the same numerical value for all
observers. The speed of light has the value c = 299 792 458 m/s, with
no error because, after having deﬁned the unit of time from a particular
atomic transition (a hyperﬁne transition of cesium-133) this value of c
is taken as the deﬁnition of the meter. However, instead of using the
meter, we can decide to use a new unit of length (or a new unit of
time) deﬁned by the statement that in these units c = 1. Then, the
velocity v of a particle is measured in units of the speed of light, which
is very natural since in particle physics we typically deal with relativistic
objects. In these units 0  v < 1 for massive particles, and v = 1 for
massless particles.
The Planck constant  is another universal constant, and it has dimensions [energy] × [time] or [length] × [momentum] as we see for instance
from the uncertainty principle. We can therefore choose units of energy
such that  = 1. Then all multiplicative factors of  and c disappear
from our equations and formally, from the point of view of dimensional
analysis,
[velocity] = pure number ,
[energy] = [momentum] = [mass] ,

(1.2)
(1.3)

[length] = [mass]−1 .

(1.4)

The ﬁrst two equations follow immediately from c = 1 while the third
follows from the fact that /(mc) is a length. Thus all physical quantities
have dimensions that can be expressed as powers of mass or, equivalently,

1.2

Typical scales in high-energy physics 5

as powers of length. For instance an energy density, [energy]/[length]3 ,
becomes a [mass]4 . Units  = c = 1 are called natural units.
The ﬁne structure constant α = e2 /(4πc)  1/137 is a pure number, and therefore in natural units the electric charge e becomes a pure
number.
To make numerical estimates, it is useful to observe that c, in ordinary units, has dimensions [energy×time]×[velocity] = [energy]×[length].
In particle physics a useful unit of energy is the MeV (= 106 eV) and a
typical length-scale is the fermi: 1 fm = 10−13 cm; one fm is the typical
size of a proton. Expressing c in MeV×fm, one gets
c  200 MeV fm .

(1.5)

(The precise value is 197.326 968 (17) MeV fm.) Then, in natural units,
1 fm  1/(200 MeV). The following examples will show that sometimes
we can go quite far in the understanding of physics with just very simple
dimensional estimates.
If we want to make dimensional estimates in QED the two parameters
that enter are the ﬁne structure constant α  1/137 and the electron
mass, me  0.5 MeV/c2 . Note that in units c = 1 masses are expressed
simply in MeV, as energies. We now consider a few examples.
The Compton radius. The simplest length-scale associated to a particle of mass m in its rest frame is its Compton radius, rC = 1/m. In
particular, for the electron
rC =

1
200 MeV fm
= 4 × 10−11 cm .

me
0.5 MeV

(1.6)

Since rC does not depend on α, it is the relevant length-scale in situations in which there is no dependence on the strength of the interaction.
Historically, rC made its ﬁrst appearance in the Compton scattering of
X-rays oﬀ electrons. Classically, the wavelength of the scattered X-rays
should be the same as the incoming waves, since the process is described
in terms of forced oscillations. Quantum mechanically, treating the Xrays as photons, we understand that part of the momentum hν of the
incoming photon is used to produce the recoil of the electron, so the momentum of the outgoing photon is smaller, and its wavelength is larger.
The wavelength of the outgoing photon is ﬁxed by energy–momentum
conservation, and therefore is independent of α, so the relevant lengthscale must be rC . Indeed, a simple computation gives
λ − λ = rC (1 − cos θ) ,

(1.7)



where λ, λ are the initial and ﬁnal X-ray wavelengths and θ is the scattering angle.
The hydrogen atom. Let us ﬁrst estimate the Bohr radius rB . The
only mass that enters the problem is the reduced mass of the electron–

6 Introduction

proton system; since mp  938 MeV is much bigger than me we can
identify the reduced mass with me , within a precision of 0.05 per cent.
Dimensionally, again rB ∼ 1/me , but now α enters. Clearly, the radius
of the bound state is smaller if the interaction responsible for the binding
is stronger, while it must go to inﬁnity in the limit α → 0, so α must be in
the denominator and it is very natural to guess that rB ∼ 1/(me α). This
is indeed the case, as can be seen with the following argument: by the
uncertainty principle, an electron conﬁned in a radius r has a momentum
p ∼ 1/r. If the electron in the hydrogen atom is non-relativistic (we will
verify the consistency of this hypothesis a posteriori) its kinetic energy
is p2 /(2me ) ∼ 1/(2me r2 ). This kinetic energy must be balanced by
the Coulomb potential, so at the equilibrium radius 1/(2me r2 ) ∼ α/r,
which indeed gives rB ∼ 1/(me α). In principle factors of 2 are beyond
the power of dimensional estimates, but here it is quite tempting to
observe that the virial theorem of classical mechanics states that, for a
potential proportional to 1/r, at equilibrium the kinetic energy is one
half of the absolute value of the potential energy, so we would guess,
2
) = α/(2rB ), i.e.
more precisely, that 1/(2me rB
rB =

1
 0.5 × 10−8 cm ,
me α

(1.8)

which is indeed the deﬁnition of the Bohr radius as found in the quantum
mechanical treatment. The typical potential energy of the hydrogen
atom is then
α
= −me α2 ,
(1.9)
V ∼ V (rB ) = −
rB
and, again using the virial theorem, the kinetic energy is
1
1
E = − V ∼ me α2 .
2
2

(1.10)

This is the kinetic energy of a non-relativistic electron with typical velocity
v ∼ α.
(1.11)
Since α
1, our approximation of a non-relativistic electron is indeed
consistent. This of course was expected, since we know that, in a ﬁrst
approximation, the non-relativistic Schrödinger equation gives a good
description of the hydrogen atom.
The sum of the kinetic and potential energy is −(1/2)me α2 so the
binding energy of the hydrogen atom is

2
1
1
1
2
binding energy = me α  0.5MeV
 13.6 eV . (1.12)
2
2
137
The Rydberg energy is indeed deﬁned as (1/2)me α2 , and the Schrödinger
equation gives the energy levels
En = −

me α2
.
2n2

(1.13)

1.2

Typical scales in high-energy physics 7

In QED this is just the ﬁrst term of an expansion in α; at next order
one ﬁnds the ﬁne structure of the hydrogen atom,



n
α4
3
α2
En,j = me − 2 − 4
−
+ ... ,
(1.14)
2n
2n
4
j + 12
where j is the total angular momentum and, to be more accurate, the
electron mass should be replaced by the reduced mass me mp /(me +mp ).
We will derive eq. (1.14) in Solved Problem 3.1. The ﬁne structure constant α gets its name from this formula. From eq. (1.11) we understand
that, in the hydrogen atom, the expansion in α is the same as an expansion in powers of v, and the ﬁne structure of the hydrogen atom is just
the ﬁrst relativistic correction.
Electron–photon scattering. We want to estimate the cross-section for
the scattering of a photon by an electron, which we take initially at rest,
e− γ → e− γ. We denote by ω the initial photon energy (in natural units
the energy of the photon E = ω becomes simply ω). The energy of the
ﬁnal photon is ﬁxed by the initial energy ω and by the scattering angle
θ, so the total cross-section (i.e. the cross-section integrated over the
scattering angle) can depend only on two energy scales, me and ω, and
on the dimensionless coupling α. The dependence on α is determined
observing that the scattering process takes place via the absorption of
the incoming photon and the emission of the outgoing photon. As we
will study in detail in Chapters 5 and 7, this is a process of second order
in perturbation theory and its amplitude is O(e2 ) so the cross-section,
which is proportional to the squared amplitude, is O(e4 ), i.e. O(α2 ).
For a generic incoming photon energy ω, we have two diﬀerent scales in
the problem and we cannot go very far with dimensional considerations.
Things simplify in the limit ω
me . In this limit we can neglect ω
compared to me and we have basically only one mass-scale, me . Since
the cross-section has dimensions [length]2 , we can estimate σ ∼ α2 /m2e .
It is therefore useful to deﬁne r0 ,
r0 =

α
 2.8 × 10−13 cm ,
me

(1.15)

so that the cross-section is σ ∼ r02 . The exact computation gives the
result
8
(1.16)
σT = πr02
3
and the factor of π is also easily understood, since a cross-section is
an eﬀective area, so it is ∼ πr02 . The electron–photon cross-section at
ω
me is known as the Thomson cross-section and can be computed
just with classical electrodynamics, since when ω
me the photons
are well described by a classical electromagnetic ﬁeld; r0 is therefore
called the classical electron radius, and gives a measure of the size of an
electron, as seen using classical electromagnetic ﬁelds as a probe.

8 Introduction

4

In general, not every quantum computation has a well-deﬁned classical limit;
just think of what happens to the black
body spectrum when  → 0 (indeed,
this example was just the original motivation of Planck for introducing !).
However, reinstating  and c explicitly, the classical electron radius is r0 =
α(/me c) = (e2 /4πc)(/me c) and 
cancels, so the limit  → 0 is well deﬁned.

Consider now the opposite limit ω
me . In this case the crosssection must have a dependence on the energy of the photon and, because
of Lorentz invariance, the cross-section integrated over the angles will
depend on the energy of the photon through the energy in the center
of mass system. If k is the initial four-momentum of the photon and
pe is the initial four-momentum of the electron, the total initial fourmomentum is p = k + pe and the square of the energy in the center of
mass is s = p2 . In the rest frame of the electron pe = (me , 0, 0, 0) and
me
k = (ω, 0, 0, ω), so s = (me +ω)2 −ω 2 = 2me ω+m2e . In the limit ω
we have s
m2e and we would expect
that
we
can
neglect
m
.
Then
the
e
√
only energy scale is provided by s, and we would expect that σ ∼ α2 /s.
Here however there is a subtlety. In the previous case, ω
me , we have
implicitly assumed that in the limit ω → 0 the cross-section is ﬁnite.
This is indeed the case, since in this limit the electromagnetic ﬁeld can be
treated classically, and the classical computation gives a ﬁnite answer.4
If instead ω
me , we are eﬀectively taking the limit me → 0; it turns
out that this limit is problematic in QED, and taking me → 0 one ﬁnds
so-called infrared divergences. In fact, from the explicit computation
one ﬁnds that the correct high-energy limit of the cross-section is


s
2πα2
σ
log
.
(1.17)
s
m2e
This is an example of the fact that divergences, which are typical of
quantum ﬁeld theory, can spoil naive dimensional analysis. We will
examine this issue in a more general context in Section 5.9.
In conclusion, we have found three diﬀerent scales that can be constructed with me and α. The largest is rB = 1/(me α) and gives the
characteristic size of an electron bound by the Coulomb potential of a
proton; rC = 1/me is the characteristic length-scale associated with a
free electron in its rest frame, and the smallest, r0 = α/me , is associated
with classical eγ scattering.
Nucleons and strong interactions. Nuclei are bound states of nucleons,
i.e. of protons and neutrons, with a radius r ∼ A1/3 ×1 fm, where A is
the total number of nucleons (so that the volume is proportional to A).
From the uncertainty principle, a particle conﬁned within 1 fm has a
momentum p ∼ 1/(1 fm)  200 MeV. If the nucleons in the nucleus are
non-relativistic, their kinetic energy is
p2N
 20 MeV
(1.18)
2mN
so this must be the typical scale of nuclear binding energies; the typical
velocity is
pN
 0.2 .
(1.19)
vN 
mN
This values of v shows that the non-relativistic approximation is roughly
correct, but relativistic corrections in nuclei are numerically more important than in atoms. Since the corrections are proportional to v 2
(compare eqs. (1.11) and (1.14)), in nuclei they are of order 4%.
EN 

1.2

Typical scales in high-energy physics 9

It is also interesting to estimate the analogue of α for the strong
interactions. For this we need to know that the nucleon–nucleon strong
potential is not Coulomb-like, but rather decays exponentially at large
distances,
αs
(1.20)
V  − e−mπ r ,
r
where αs is the coupling constant of strong interactions and mπ 
140 MeV is the mass of a particle, the pion, that at length-scales l >
∼1 fm
can be considered the mediator of the strong interaction (we will derive this result in Section 6.6). Consider for instance a proton–neutron
system, which makes a bound state (the nucleus of deuterium) of radius r ∼ 1 fm. At equilibrium, (−1/2)V must be equal to the kinetic
energy p2 /(2m) ∼ 1/(2mr2 ), where m  mp /2 is the reduced mass of
the two-nucleon system (and the −1/2 comes again from the virial theorem). Since we already know that the equilibrium radius is at r  1 fm,
we ﬁnd αs ∼ 2(mp r)−1 exp{mπ r}|r=1 fm ∼ 0.8. The precise numerical
value is not of great signiﬁcance, since we are making order of magnitude estimates, but anyway this shows that the coupling αs is not a
small number, and strong interactions cannot be treated perturbatively
in the same way as QED.5
Lifetime and cross-sections of strong interactions. Hadrons are deﬁned as particles which have strong interactions. If a particle decays
by strong interactions it is possible to estimate its lifetime τ as follows.
The quantities that can enter the computation of the lifetime are the
coupling αs , the masses of the particles involved, and the typical interaction radius of the strong interactions. However, these particles have
typical masses in the GeV range, and the interaction range of the strong
interaction ∼ 1fm  (200MeV)−1 . Then all energy scales in the problem
are between a few hundred MeV and a few GeV, so in a ﬁrst approximation we can say that the only length-scale in the problem is of the
order of the fermi. Furthermore, we have seen that αs = O(1). This
means that, in order of magnitude, the lifetimes of particles which decay
by strong interactions are in the ballpark of τ ∼ 1 fm/c ∼ 3 × 10 −24 s.
Particles with such a small lifetime only show up as peaks in a plot of
a scattering cross-section against the energy, and are called resonances,
since the mechanism that produces the peak is conceptually the same as
the resonance in classical mechanics (we will discuss resonances in detail
in Section 6.5). The width Γ of the peak is related to the lifetime by
Γ = /τ or, in natural units,
Γ=

1
1
∼
 200 MeV .
τ
1 fm

(1.21)

We can estimate similarly the typical cross-sections of processes mediated by strong interactions. Since a cross-section is an eﬀective area,
we must typically have σ ∼ π (1 fm)2 ∼ 3 × 10−26 cm2 . A common unit
for cross-sections is the barn, 1 barn = 10−24 cm2 . Therefore a typical
strong interactions cross-section, in the absence of dynamical phenomena

5

We will see in Section 5.9 that the
coupling constants actually are not constant at all, but rather depend on the
length-scale at which they are measured. We will see that the correct
statement is that the theory of strong
interactions, QCD, cannot be treated
perturbatively at length-scales l>
∼1 fm,
while αs becomes small at l  1 fm,
and there perturbation theory works
well.

10 Introduction

like resonances, is of the order of 30 millibarns. Here we have implicitly assumed that the particles are relativistic, i.e. their relative speed
is close to one. Otherwise we must take into account that the relevant
length-scale for a particle of mass m and velocity v
1 is given by
the De Broglie wavelength λ = 1/(mv)
1/m, and a typical nuclear
cross-section for slow particles, in the absence of resonances, is of the
order σ ∼ πλ2 , see Exercise 1.3.
Electroweak decays. Leptons do not have strong interactions and either are stable or decay through electroweak interactions. Furthermore,
strong interactions obey a number of conservation laws, which result in
the fact that also many hadrons cannot decay via the strong interaction;
in this case they decay through electroweak interactions (except for the
proton, which in the Standard Model is stable) and their lifetime is considerably longer than the typical lifetimes τ ∼ 10−24 s of strong decays.
Weak decays span a broad range of lifetimes because they depend on
quite diﬀerent mass-scales: the electroweak scale, the mass of the decaying
particle, and the masses of the decay products. While in the case
Table 1.1 Examples of electroweak decays.
In the right column we give the lifetime of of hadronic resonances the scales which are involved are all between a
the decaying particle and in the left column few hundred MeV and a few GeV, for weak decays these scales can be
its main decay mode. Observe the broad
range of lifetimes. For lifetimes so small as very diﬀerent from each other: the electroweak scale is O(100) GeV,
for the Z 0 , it is more convenient to give the while the masses of the decaying particle or of the decay products can
decay width. For the Z 0 , the full width is be anywhere between zero (for the photon) or less than a few eV (for the
Γ = 2.4952(23) GeV.
electron neutrino) up to hundreds of GeV. Furthermore the electroweak
coupling constants are not of order one. Rather, the electromagnetic
main mode
lifetime (sec)
coupling is α ∼ 1/137  0.007 while, as we will discuss in Chapter 8,
−
3
weak interactions are characterized by two coupling constants g 2 /(4π)
n
→ pe ν̄e
0.8857(8) × 10
and ḡ 2 /(4π) both numerically of order 0.1. For these reasons the elecµ− → e− ν̄e νµ
2.19703(4) × 10−6
troweak lifetimes, even in order of magnitude, vary from case to case.
π + → µ+ νµ
2.6033(5) × 10−8
Some examples are given in Table 1.1.
0
−
−10
Λ
→ pπ
2.632(20) × 10
The lifetime can be written as
0
+
−
−10
K → π π
0.8958(6) × 10
S

π0

→ γγ

0.84(6) × 10−16

Σ0

→ Λγ

0.74(7) × 10−19

Z0

→ hadrons

2.6379(24) × 10−25

τ=



= 
Γ
i Γi

(1.22)

where in the last equality the sum runs over all decay channels. Γ is
called the full width, while the Γi are the partial widths relative to the
decay mode labeled by i. In the ﬁrst column of Table 1.1 we give the
dominant decay mode, i.e. the mode with the largest partial width. In
the second column we give the lifetime, i.e. the inverse of the full width.
The quantity Γi /Γ is called the branching ratio of the mode labeled by
i. We will compute explicitly many weak decays in the Solved Problems
section of Chapter 8.
The Planck mass. Using simple dimensional estimates we can also
understand the statement made at the end of Section 1.1 that, in the
realm of particle physics, gravity enters into play only at huge energies.
Comparing the Newton potential V = −GN m2 /r with a Coulomb potential V = −e2 /4πr = −(αc)/r, we see that GN times a mass squared

1.2

Typical scales in high-energy physics 11

has the dimensions of c. Therefore from the fundamental constants
, c, GN we can build a mass-scale
MPl =

c
,
GN

(1.23)

known as the Planck mass, whose numerical value is MPl  1.2 ×
2
1019 GeV/c2 . In natural units, then, GN = 1/MPl
and we see, comparing the Newton and Coulomb laws, that the gravitational analogue
of the ﬁne structure constant is (m/MPl )2 . More precisely, since in general relativity any form of energy is a source for the gravitational ﬁeld,
particles with an energy E have an eﬀective gravitational coupling
αG =

E2
2 .
MPl

(1.24)

At the typical energies of particle physics, say E ∼ 1 GeV, we have
αG ∼ 10−38 and gravity is completely irrelevant. In the realm of particle physics, gravity becomes important only at energies comparable to
the Planck scale. These considerations only apply to the microscopic
domain. On the macroscopic scale, gravity can become more important
than electric interactions because it is always attractive, so it has a cumulative eﬀect, while on a large scale the electrostatic forces are screened
by the formation of electrically neutral objects, and the residual force
decreases faster than 1/r 2 .
Since MPl provides a natural mass-scale, in quantum gravity it is
customary to use units in which not only  and c but also MPl are
set equal to one. These are called Planck units, and in these units all
physical quantities are dimensionless. We will not use them in this book.

Further reading
• A historical introduction to quantum ﬁeld theory
is given in Weinberg (1995), Chapter 1.

namics, World Scientiﬁc, Singapore 1990. Recently
the measure of the g − 2 of the muon has been further improved by an experiment in Brookhaven, see
the link http://www.g-2.bnl.gov/

• The standard compilation of experimental data
for high-energy physics is the Review of Particle
Physics of the Particle Data Group. Unless explicitly stated otherwise, our experimental data are
taken from the 2004 edition, S. Eidelman et al.,
Phys. Lett. B592, 1 (2004), also available on-line
at http://pdg.lbl.gov.

• A well-written popular book, which gives a ﬂavor
of modern research in quantum gravity and string
theory is B. Greene, The elegant universe: superstrings, hidden dimensions, and the quest for the
ultimate theory, Norton, New York 1999.

• Precision measurements are a fascinating ﬁeld
by themselves; the experimentally minded student might enjoy browsing the detailed article by
F. J. M. Farley and E. Picasso, The muon g-2 experiment, in T. Kinoshita ed., Quantum Electrody-

• QFT is a domain where there can be an interplay
between frontier research in theoretical physics and
in pure mathematics, and in the last decades this
has generated important advances in both ﬁelds.
The physicist who wishes an introduction to the ap-

12 Introduction
plication to physics of important concepts of geometry and topology (like cohomology groups, complex manifolds, ﬁbre bundles, characteristic classes,
etc.) can consult, for instance, Nakahara (1990).
These concepts ﬁnd many applications in the theory of non-abelian gauge ﬁelds and in string the-

ory. Conversely, the mathematician interested in
the mathematical applications of QFT, supersymmetry and string theory is referred to P. Deligne
et al. eds., Quantum Fields and Strings: A Course
for Mathematicians, AMS IAS 1999.

Exercises
(1.1) The Universe is permeated by a thermal background of electromagnetic radiation at a temperature T = 2.725(1) K (the cosmic microwave background radiation, or CMB). Estimate with dimensional arguments the energy density of this gas of
photons and compare it with the critical density for
closing the Universe, ρc ∼ 0.5 × 10−5 GeV/cm3 .
[Hint: a useful mnemonic for kB is given by
the fact that, at room temperature T = 300 K,
kB T  (1/40) eV. In the energy density, the numerical constant in front of (kB T )4 turns out to be
(π 2 /30)g(T ), where g(T ) is of the order of the number of particles which are relativistic at a temperature T , i.e. which have m  T . With T  2.7 K,
only the photon and at most three neutrinos are
relativistic and g(T ) is between 3 and 4. Then,
for the purpose of this exercise, the only thing that
matters is that the constant (π 2 /30)g(T ) is of order
one.]
(1.2) Model the Sun as an ionized plasma of electrons

and protons, with an average temperature T 
4.5 × 106 K and an average mass density ρ 
1.4 gm/cm3 . Estimate the mean free path of photons in the Sun’s interior, and compare the contribution to the mean free path coming from the
scattering on electrons with that from the scattering on protons. Knowing that the radius of the Sun
is R  6.96×1010 cm, estimate the total time that
a photon takes to escape from the Sun.
[Hint: recall that the mean free path l of a particle
scattering oﬀ an ensemble of targets with number
density (i.e. particles per unit volume) n and crosssection σ is
1
(1.25)
l=
nσ
or,Pif there are diﬀerent species of targets, l =
1/ i ni σi .]
(1.3) Estimate the cross-section for a non-relativistic
neutron with kinetic energy E ∼ 1 MeV, scattering
on a proton at rest.

Lorentz and Poincaré
symmetries in QFT
We mentioned in the Introduction that quantum ﬁeld theory (QFT) is
a synthesis of the principles of quantum mechanics and of special relativity. Our ﬁrst task will be to understand how Lorentz symmetry is
implemented in ﬁeld theory. We will study the representations of the
Lorentz group in terms of ﬁelds and we will introduce scalar, spinor,
and vector ﬁelds. We will then examine the information coming from
Poincaré invariance. This chapter is rather mathematical and formal.
The eﬀort will pay, however, since an understanding of this group theoretical approach greatly simpliﬁes the construction of the Lagrangians
for the various ﬁelds in Chapter 3 and gives in general a deeper understanding of various aspects of QFT.
From now on we always use natural units  = c = 1.

2.1

Lie groups

Lie groups play a central role in physics, and in this section we recall
some of their main properties. In the next sections we will apply these
concepts to the study of the Lorentz and Poincaré groups.
A Lie group is a group whose elements g depend in a continuous and
diﬀerentiable way on a set of real parameters θ a , a = 1, . . . , N . Therefore
a Lie group is at the same time a group and a diﬀerentiable manifold.
We write a generic element as g(θ) and without loss of generality we
choose the coordinates θ a such that the identity element e of the group
corresponds to θ a = 0, i.e. g(0) = e.
A (linear) representation R of a group is an operation that assigns to
a generic, abstract element g of a group a linear operator DR (g) deﬁned
on a linear space,
(2.1)
g → DR (g)
with the properties that
(i): DR (e) = 1, where 1 is the identity operator, and
(ii): DR (g1 )DR (g2 ) = DR (g1 g2 ), so that the mapping preserves the
group structure.
The space on which the operators DR act is called the basis for the
representation R. A typical example of a representation is a matrix representation. In this case the basis is a vector space of ﬁnite dimension

2
2.1 Lie groups

13

2.2 The Lorentz group

16

2.3 The Lorentz algebra

18

2.4 Tensor representations

20

2.5 Spinorial representations

24

2.6 Field representations

29

2.7 The Poincaré group

34

14 Lorentz and Poincaré symmetries in QFT

n, and an abstract group element g is represented by a n × n matrix
(DR (g))i j , with i, j = 1, . . . , n. The dimension of the representation
is deﬁned as the dimension n of the base space. Writing a generic element of the base space as (φ1 , . . . , φn ), a group element g induces a
transformation of the vector space
φi → (DR (g))i j φj .

(2.2)

Equation (2.2) allows us to attach a physical meaning to a group element: before introducing the concept of representation, a group element
g is just an abstract mathematical object, deﬁned by its composition
rules with the other group members. Choosing a speciﬁc representation
instead allows us to interpret g as a transformation on a certain space;
for instance, taking as group SO(3) and as base space the spatial vectors
v, an element g ∈ SO(3) can be interpreted physically as a rotation in
three-dimensional space.
A representation R is called reducible if it has an invariant subspace,
i.e. if the action of any DR (g) on the vectors in the subspace gives
another vector of the subspace. Conversely, a representation with no
invariant subspace is called irreducible. A representation is completely
reducible if, for all elements g, the matrices DR (g) can be written, with
a suitable choice of basis, in block diagonal form. In other words, in a
completely reducible representation the basis vectors φi can be chosen
so that they split into subsets that do not mix with each other under
eq. (2.2). This means that a completely reducible representation can be
written, with a suitable choice of basis, as the direct sum of irreducible
representations.
Two representations R, R are called equivalent if there is a matrix
S, independent of g, such that for all g we have DR (g) = S −1 DR (g)S.
Comparing with eq. (2.2), we see that equivalent representations correspond to a change of basis in the vector space spanned by the φi .
When we change the representation, in general the explicit form and
even the dimensions of the matrices DR (g) will change. However, there
is an important property of a Lie group that is independent of the representation. This is its Lie algebra, which we now introduce.
By the assumption of smoothness, for θ a inﬁnitesimal, i.e. in the
neighborhood of the identity element, we have
DR (θ)  1 + iθa TRa ,
with

1

To be precise, this is only true for the
component of the group manifold connected with the identity.




∂DR 
TRa ≡ −i
∂θa θ=0

.

(2.3)

(2.4)

The TRa are called the generators of the group in the representation R.
It can be shown that, with an appropriate choice of the parametrization
far from the identity, the generic group elements g(θ) can always be
represented by1
a

DR (g(θ)) = eiθa TR ,

(2.5)

2.1

Lie groups 15

whose inﬁnitesimal form reproduces eq. (2.3). The factor i in the deﬁnition (2.4) is chosen so that, if in the representation R the generators
are hermitian, then the matrices DR (g) are unitary. In this case R is a
unitary representation.
Given two matrices DR (g1 ) = exp(iαa TRa ) and DR (g2 ) = exp(iβa TRa ),
their product is equal to DR (g1 g2 ) and therefore must be of the form
exp(iδa TRa ), for some δa (α, β),
a

a

a

eiαa TR eiβa TR = eiδa TR .

(2.6)

Observe that TRa is a matrix. If A, B are matrices, in general eA eB =
eA+B , so in general δa = αa + βa . Taking the logarithm and expanding
up to second order in α and β we get
1
1
iδa TRa = log [1 + iαa TRa + (iαa TRa )2 ][1 + iβa TRa + (iβa TRa )2 ] (2.7)
2
2

1
1
= log 1 + i(αa + βa )TRa − (αa TRa )2 − (βa TRa )2 − αa βb TRa TRb .
2
2
Expanding the logarithm, log(1 + x)  x − x2 /2, and paying attention
to the fact that the TRa do not commute we get

(2.8)
αa βb TRa , TRb = iγc (α, β)TRc ,
with γc (α, β) = −2(δc (α, β) − αc − βc ). Since this must be true for all
α and β, γc must be linear in αa and in βa , so the relation between γ
and α, β must be of the general form γc = αa βb f ab c for some constants
f ab c . Therefore
[T a , T b ] = if ab c T c .

(2.9)

This is called the Lie algebra of the group under consideration. Two important points must be noted here. The ﬁrst is that, even if the explicit
form of the generators T a depends on the representation used, the structure constants f ab c are independent of the representation. In fact, if f ab c
were to depend on the representation, γ a and therefore δ a would also
a
depend on R, so it would be of the form δR
(α, β). Then from eq. (2.6)
we would conclude that the product of the group elements g1 and g2
gives a result which depends on the representation. This is impossible,
since the result of the multiplication of two abstract group element g1 g2
is a property of the group, deﬁned at the abstract group level without
any reference to the representations. Therefore, we conclude that f ab c
are independent of the representation.2 The second important point is
that this equation has been derived requiring the consistency of eq. (2.6)
to second order; however, once this is satisﬁed, it can be proved that no
further requirement comes from the expansion at higher orders.
Thus the structure constants deﬁne the Lie algebra, and the problem
of ﬁnding all matrix representations of a Lie algebra amounts to the
algebraic problem of ﬁnding all possible matrix solutions TRa of eq. (2.9).

2
Actually, the generators of a Lie group
can even be deﬁned without making
any reference to a speciﬁc representation. One makes use of the fact
that a Lie group is also a manifold,
parametrized by the coordinates θ a ,
and deﬁnes the generators as a basis of
the tangent space at the origin. One
then proves that their commutator (deﬁned as a Lie bracket) is again a tangent vector, and therefore it must be a
linear combination of the basis vector.
In this approach no speciﬁc representation is ever mentioned, so it becomes
obvious that the structure constants are
independent of the representation. See,
e.g., Nakahara (1990), Section 5.6.

16 Lorentz and Poincaré symmetries in QFT

A group is called abelian if all its elements commute between themselves, otherwise the group is non-abelian. For an abelian Lie group
the structure constants vanish, since in this case in eq. (2.6) we have
δa = αa + βa . The representation theory of abelian Lie algebras is very
simple: any d-dimensional abelian Lie algebra is isomorphic to the direct sum of d one-dimensional abelian Lie algebras. In other words, all
irreducible representations of abelian groups are one-dimensional. The
non-trivial part of the representation theory of Lie algebras is related to
the non-abelian structure.
In the study of the representations, an important role is played by
the Casimir operators. These are operators constructed from the T a
that commute with all the T a . In each irreducible representation, the
Casimir operators are proportional to the identity matrix, and the proportionality constant labels the representation.
For example, the angu
lar momentum algebra is J i , J j = iijk J k and the Casimir operator is
J2 . On an irreducible representation, J2 is equal to j(j + 1) times the
identity matrix, with j = 0, 21 , 1, . . ..
A Lie group that, considered as a manifold, is a compact manifold is
called a compact group. Spatial rotations are an example of a compact
Lie group, while we will see that the Lorentz group is non-compact. A
theorem states that non-compact groups have no unitary representations
of ﬁnite dimension, except for representations in which the non-compact
generators are represented trivially, i.e. as zero. The physical relevance of this theorem is due to the fact that in a unitary representation
the generators are hermitian operators and, according to the rules of
quantum mechanics, only hermitian operators can be identiﬁed with observables. If a group is non-compact, in order to identify its generators
with physical observables we need an inﬁnite-dimensional representation. We will see in this chapter that the Lorentz and Poincaré groups
are non-compact, and that inﬁnite-dimensional representations are obtained introducing the Hilbert space of one-particle states.

2.2

The Lorentz group

The Lorentz group is deﬁned as the group of linear coordinate transformations,
(2.10)
xµ → xµ = Λµν xν
which leave invariant the quantity
ηµν xµ xν = t2 − x2 − y 2 − z 2 .

(2.11)

The group of transformations of a space with coordinates (y1 , . . . ym ,
2
x1 , . . . xn ), which leaves invariant the quadratic form (y12 + . . . + ym
)−
2
2
(x1 + . . . + xn ) is called the orthogonal group O(n, m), so the Lorentz
group is O(3, 1). The condition that the matrix Λ must satisfy in order
to leave invariant the quadratic form (2.11) is
ηµν xµ xν = ηµν (Λµρ xρ )(Λν σ xσ ) = ηρσ xρ xσ .

(2.12)

2.2

Since this must hold for x generic, we must have
ηρσ = ηµν Λµρ Λν σ .

(2.13)

In matrix notation, this can be rewritten as η = ΛT ηΛ. Taking the determinant of both sides, we therefore have (det Λ)2 = 1 or det Λ = ±1.
Transformations with det Λ = −1 can always be written as the product
of a transformation with det Λ = 1 and of a discrete transformation that
reverses the sign of an odd number of coordinates, e.g. a parity transformation (t, x, y, z) → (t, −x, −y, −z), or a reﬂection around a single
spatial axis (t, x, y, z) → (t, −x, y, z), or a time-reversal transformation,
(t, x, y, z) → (−t, x, y, z). Transformations with det Λ = +1 are called
proper Lorentz transformations. The subgroup of O(3, 1) with det Λ = 1
is denoted by SO(3, 1).
Writing explicitly the 00 component of eq. (2.13) we ﬁnd
1 = (Λ0 0 )2 −

3


(Λi 0 )2

(2.14)

i=1

which implies that (Λ0 0 )2  1. Therefore the proper Lorentz group
has two disconnected components, one with Λ0 0  1 and one with
Λ0 0  −1, called orthochronous and non-orthochronous, respectively.
Any non-orthochronous transformation can be written as the product
of an orthochronous transformation and a discrete inversion of the type
(t, x, y, z) → (−t, −x, −y, −z), or (t, x, y, z) → (−t, −x, y, z), etc. It is
convenient to factor out all these discrete transformations, and to redeﬁne the Lorentz group as the component of SO(3, 1) for which Λ0 0  1.
If we consider an inﬁnitesimal transformation
Λµν = δνµ + ω µν

(2.15)

ωµν = −ωνµ .

(2.16)

eq. (2.13) gives
An antisymmetric 4 × 4 matrix has six independent elements, so the
Lorentz group has six parameters. These are easily identiﬁed: ﬁrst
of all we have the transformations which leave t invariant. This is
just the SO(3) rotation group, generated by the three rotations in the
(x, y), (x, z) and (y, z) planes. Furthermore, we have three transformations in the (t, x), (t, y) and (t, z) planes that leave invariant t2 − x2 , etc.
A transformation that leaves t2 − x2 invariant is called a boost along the
x axis, and can be written as
t → γ(t + vx) ,

x → γ(x + vt) .

(2.17)

with γ = (1 − v 2 )−1/2 and −1 < v < 1. Its physical meaning is understood looking at the small v limit, where it reduces to the velocity
transformation of classical mechanics. It is therefore the relativistic generalization of a velocity transformation. The six independent parameters
of the Lorentz group can therefore be taken as the three rotation angles
and the three components of the velocity v.

The Lorentz group 17

18 Lorentz and Poincaré symmetries in QFT

Since −1 < v < 1, we can write v = tanh η, with −∞ < η < +∞.
Then γ = cosh η and eq. (2.17) can be written as a hyperbolic rotation,
t → (cosh η)t + (sinh η)x
x → (sinh η)t + (cosh η)x .

(2.18)

The variable η is called the rapidity.
We see that the Lorentz group is parametrized in a continuous and
diﬀerentiable way by six parameters, and it is therefore a Lie group.
However, in the Lorentz group one of the parameters is the modulus
of the boost velocity, |v|, which ranges over the non-compact interval
0  |v| < 1. Therefore the Lorentz group is non-compact.

2.3

The Lorentz algebra

We have seen that the Lorentz group has six parameters, the six independent elements of the antisymmetric matrix ωµν , to which correspond
six generators. It is convenient to label the generators as J µν , with a
pair of antisymmetric indices (µ, ν), so that J µν = −J νµ . A generic
element Λ of the Lorentz group is therefore written as
Λ = e− 2 ωµν J
i

µν

.

(2.19)

The factor 1/2 in the exponent compensates for the fact that we are
summing over all µ, ν rather than over the independent pairs with µ < ν,
and therefore each generator is counted twice.
By deﬁnition a set of objects φi , with i = 1, . . . , n, transforms in a
representation R of dimension n of the Lorentz group if, under a Lorentz
transformation,


µν

φi → e− 2 ωµν JR
i

i

φj ,

(2.20)

j

µν
where exp{−(i/2)ωµν JR
} is a matrix representation of dimension n of
µν
the abstract element (2.19) of the Lorentz group; JR
are the Lorentz
generators in the representation R, and are n × n matrices. Under
an inﬁnitesimal transformation with inﬁnitesimal parameters ωµν , the
variation of φi is
i
µν i
δφi = − ωµν (JR
) j φj .
(2.21)
2
µν i
) j the pair of indices µ, ν identify the generator while the indices
In (JR
i, j are the matrix indices of the representation that we are considering.
All physical quantities can be classiﬁed accordingly to their transformation properties under the Lorentz group. A scalar is a quantity that is
invariant under the transformation. A typical Lorentz scalar in particle
physics is the rest mass of a particle. A contravariant four-vector V µ is
deﬁned as an object that satisﬁes the transformation law

V µ → Λµν V ν ,

(2.22)

with Λµ ν deﬁned by the condition (2.13). A covariant four-vector Vµ
transforms as Vµ → Λµ ν Vν , with Λµ ν = ηµρ η νσ Λρ σ . One immediately

2.3

veriﬁes that, if V µ is a contravariant four-vector, then Vµ ≡ ηµν V ν is a
covariant four-vector. We refer generically to covariant and contravariant four-vectors simply as four-vectors. The space-time coordinates xµ
are the simplest example of four-vector. Another particularly important
example is given by the four-momentum pµ = (E, p).
µν i
The explicit form of the generators (JR
) j as n × n matrices depends
on the particular representation that we are considering. For a scalar φ,
the index i takes only one value, so it is a one-dimensional representation,
and (J µν )i j is a 1 × 1 matrix, i.e. a number, for each given pair (µ, ν).
But in fact, by deﬁnition, on a scalar a Lorentz transformation is the
identity transformation, so δφ = 0 and J µν = 0. A representation in
which all generators are equal to zero is trivially a solution of eq. (2.9),
for any Lie group, and so it is called the trivial representation.
The four-vector representation is more interesting. In this case i, j
are themselves Lorentz indices, so each generator J µν is represented by
a 4 × 4 matrix (J µν )ρ σ . The explicit form of this matrix is
(J µν )ρ σ = i (η µρ δσν − η νρ δσµ ) .

(2.23)

This can be shown observing that, from eqs. (2.22) and (2.15), the variation of a four-vector V µ under an inﬁnitesimal Lorentz transformation
is δV µ = ω µν V ν , which can be rewritten as
i
δV ρ = − ωµν (J µν )ρ σ V σ ,
2

(2.24)

with (J µν )ρ σ given by eq. (2.23) (this solution for J µν is unique because we require the antisymmetry under µ ↔ ν). This representation
is irreducible since a generic Lorentz transformation mixes all four components of a four-vector and therefore there is no change of basis that
allows us to write (J µν )ρ σ in block diagonal form. We can now use the
explicit expression (2.23) to compute the commutators, and we ﬁnd
[J µν , J ρσ ] = i (η νρ J µσ − η µρ J νσ − η νσ J µρ + η µσ J νρ ) .

(2.25)

This is the Lie algebra of SO(3, 1). It is convenient to rearrange the six
components of J µν into two spatial vectors,
Ji =

1 ijk jk
 J ,
2

K i = J i0 .

(2.26)

In terms of J i , K i the Lie algebra of the Lorentz group (2.25) becomes

(2.27)
J i , J j = iijk J k ,

J i , K j = iijk K k ,
(2.28)

K i , K j = −iijk J k .
(2.29)
Equation (2.27) is the Lie algebra of SU (2) and this shows that J i ,
deﬁned in eq. (2.26), is the angular momentum. Instead eq. (2.28) expresses the fact that K is a spatial vector.

The Lorentz algebra 19

20 Lorentz and Poincaré symmetries in QFT

We also introduce the deﬁnitions θ i = (1/2)ijk ω jk and η i = ω i0 .
Then
3

1
ωµν J µν = ω12 J 12 + ω13 J 13 + ω23 J 23 +
ωi0 J i0
2
i=1

= θ ·J −η · K,

(2.30)

where we used ωi0 = −ω i0 = −η i while ω12 = ω 12 = θ3 , etc. Then a
Lorentz transformation can be written as
Λ = exp{−iθ · J + iη · K} .

3

This is the “active” point of view. Alternatively, we can say that we keep P
ﬁxed and we rotate the reference frame
clockwise; this is the “passive” point of
view.

(2.31)

With our deﬁnitions θ i = +(1/2)ijk ω jk and η i = +ω i0 a rotation by
an angle θ > 0 in the (x, y) plane rotates counterclockwise the position
of a point P with respect to a ﬁxed reference frame,3 while performing
a boost of velocity v on a particle at rest we get a particle with velocity
+v. To check these signs, we can consider inﬁnitesimal transformations,
and use the explicit form (2.23) of the generators. Performing a rotation
by an angle θ around the z axis, eqs. (2.31) and (2.23) give
δxµ = −iθ(J 12 )µ ν xν = θ (η 1µ δν2 − η 2µ δν1 )xν

(2.32)

and therefore δx = −θy and δy = +θx, corresponding to a counterclockwise rotation. Similarly, performing a boost along the x axis,
δxµ = +iη(J 10 )µ ν xν = −η (η 1µ δν0 − η 0µ δν1 )xν

(2.33)

and therefore δt = +η x and δx = +η t, which is the inﬁnitesimal form
of eq. (2.18).

2.4

Tensor representations

By deﬁnition a tensor T µν with two contravariant (i.e. upper) indices is
an object that transforms as
 

T µν → Λµµ Λν ν  T µ ν .

(2.34)

In general, a tensor with an arbitrary number of upper and lower indices

transforms with a factor Λµµ for each upper index and a factor Λµµ for
each lower index.
Tensors are examples of representations of the Lorentz group. For
instance, a generic tensor T µν with two indices has 16 components and
eq. (2.34) shows that these 16 components transform among themselves,
i.e. they are a basis for a representation of dimension 16. However, this
representation is reducible. From eq. (2.34) we see that, if T µν is antisymmetric, after a Lorentz transformation it remains antisymmetric,
while if it is symmetric it remains symmetric. So the symmetric and
antisymmetric parts of a tensor T µν do not mix, and the 16-dimensional

2.4

Tensor representations 21

representation is reducible into a six-dimensional antisymmetric representation Aµν = (1/2)(T µν − T νµ ) and a 10-dimensional symmetric representation S µν = (1/2)(T µν + T νµ ). Furthermore, also the trace of a
symmetric tensor is invariant,
S ≡ ηµν S µν → ηµν Λµρ Λν σ S ρσ = S ,

(2.35)

where in the last step we used the deﬁning property of the Lorentz group,
eq. (2.13). This means, in particular, that a traceless tensor remains
traceless after a Lorentz transformation, and thus the 10-dimensional
symmetric representation decomposes further into a nine-dimensional
irreducible symmetric traceless representation, S µν − (1/4)η µν S, and
the one-dimensional scalar representation S.
The following notation is commonly used: an irreducible representation is denoted by its dimensionality, written in boldface. Thus the
scalar representation is denoted as 1, the four-vector representation as 4,
the antisymmetric tensor as 6 and the traceless symmetric tensor as 9.4
The tensor representation (2.34) is a tensor product of two four-vector
representations, which means that each of the two indices of T µν transforms separately as a four-vector index, i.e. with the matrix Λ. The
tensor product of two representations is denoted by the symbol ⊗. We
have found above that the tensor product of two four-vector representations decomposes into the direct sum of the 1, 6, and 9 representations.
Denoting the direct sum by ⊕, we have5
4 ⊗4 = 1⊕6⊕9.

(2.36)

The decomposition into irreducible representations of tensors with more
than two indices can be obtained similarly. The most general irreducible
tensor representations of the Lorentz group are found starting from a
generic tensor with an arbitrary number of indices, removing ﬁrst all
traces, and then symmetrizing or antisymmetrizing over all pairs of indices. Note that, using η µν , we can always restrict to contravariant
tensors; for instance V µ and Vµ are equivalent representations.
All tensor representations are in a sense derived from the four-vector
representation, since the transformation law of a tensor is obtained applying separately on each Lorentz index the matrix Λµν that deﬁnes the
transformation of four-vectors. This means that (as the name suggests)
tensor representations are tensor products of the four-vector representation. For this reason, the four-vector representation plays a distinguished
role and is called the fundamental representation of SO(3, 1).6
Another representation of special importance is the adjoint representation. It is a representation which has the same dimension as the number
of generators. This means that we can use the same type of indices a, b, c
for labeling the generator and its matrix elements, and for any Lie group
it can be written in full generality in terms of the structure constants,
as
a b
) c = −if ab c .
(2.37)
(Tadj
The Lie algebra (2.9) is automatically satisﬁed by (2.37). This follows
from the fact that, for all matrices A, B, C, there is an algebraic identity

4

If two inequivalent representations
happen to have the same dimensionality one can use a prime or an index to
distinguish between them.

5

In Exercise 2.5 we discuss the separation of the representation 6, i.e.
the antisymmetric tensor, into its selfdual and anti-self-dual parts, both in
Minkowski space and in a Euclidean
space with metric δ µν . We will see
that in the Euclidean case the antisymmetric tensor Aµν is reducible and
decomposes into two three-dimensional
representations corresponding to selfdual and anti-self-dual tensors, while in
Minkowski space an antisymmetric tensor Aµν with real components is irreducible.

6

To avoid all misunderstanding, we anticipate that in Section 2.5 we will
enlarge the deﬁnition of the Lorentz
group to include spinorial representations. With this enlarged deﬁnition,
four-vectors are no longer the fundamental representation of the Lorentz
group. Instead, all representations of
the Lorentz group will be built from the
spinorial representations (1/2, 0) and
(0, 1/2) that will be deﬁned in Section 2.5.

22 Lorentz and Poincaré symmetries in QFT

known as the Jacobi identity,
[A, [B, C]] + [B, [C, A]] + [C, [A, B]] = 0 ,

(2.38)

which is easily veriﬁed writing the commutators explicitly. Setting in
this identity A = T a , B = T b and C = T c we ﬁnd that the structure
constants of any Lie group obey the identity
f ab d f cd e + f bc d f ad e + f ca d f bd e = 0 .

(2.39)

If we substitute eq. (2.37) into eq. (2.9), we see that the Lie algebra is
automatically satisﬁed because of eq. (2.39).
For the Lorentz group, the adjoint representation has dimension six, so
it is given by the antisymmetric tensor Aµν . The adjoint representation
plays an especially important role in non-abelian gauge theories, as we
will see in Chapter 10.
All the representation theory on tensors that we have developed having
in mind SO(3, 1) goes through for SO(n) or SO(n, m) generic, simply
replacing ηµν with δµν for SO(n), or with a diagonal matrix with n
minus signs and m plus sign for SO(n, m).

2.4.1

Decomposition of Lorentz tensors under
SO(3)

Since we know how a tensor behaves under a generic Lorentz transformation, we know in particular its transformation properties under the
SO(3) rotation subgroup, and we can therefore ask what is the angular momentum j of the various tensor representations. Recall that the
representations of SO(3) are labeled by an index j which takes integer
values j = 0, 1, 2, . . ., and the dimension of the representation labeled
by j is 2j + 1. Within each representation, these 2j + 1 states are labeled by jz = −j, . . . , j. For SO(3), it is more common to denote the
representation as j, i.e. to label it with the angular momentum rather
than with the dimension of the representation, 2j + 1. In this notation,
0 is the scalar (also called the singlet), 1 is a triplet with components
jz = −1, 0, 1, while 2 is a representation of dimension 5, etc. (if we
rather use the same convention as in the case of the Lorentz group, i.e.
we label them by their dimensionality, we should write 1, 3, 5, . . .).
A Lorentz scalar is of course also scalar under rotations, so it has
j = 0. A four-vector V µ = (V 0 , V) is an irreducible representation
of the Lorentz group, since a generic Lorentz transformation mixes all
four components, but from the point of view of the SO(3) subgroup it is
reducible: spatial rotations do not mix V 0 with V; V 0 is invariant under
spatial rotations, so it has j = 0, while the three spatial components V i
form an irreducible three-dimensional representation of SO(3), so they
have j = 1. In group theory language we say that, from the point of
view of spatial rotations, a four-vector decomposes into the direct sum
of a scalar and a j = 1 representation,
Vµ ∈0⊕1

(2.40)

2.4

or, if we prefer to label the representations by their dimension, rather
than by j, we write 4 = 1 ⊕ 3. The former notation indicates more
clearly what are the spins involved while the latter makes apparent that
the number of degrees of freedom on the left-hand side matches those
on the right-hand side.
We now want to understand what angular momenta appear in a
generic tensor T µν with two indices. By deﬁnition a tensor T µν transforms as the tensor product of two four-vector representations. Since,
from the point of view of SO(3), a four-vector is 0 ⊕ 1, a generic tensor
with two indices has the following decomposition in angular momenta
T µν ∈ (0 ⊕ 1) ⊗ (0 ⊕ 1) = (0 ⊗ 0) ⊕ (0 ⊗ 1) ⊕ (1 ⊗ 0) ⊕ (1 ⊗ 1)
= 0 ⊕ 1 ⊕ 1 ⊕ (0 ⊕ 1 ⊕ 2) .

(2.41)

In the last step we used the usual rule of composition of angular momenta, which says that composing two angular momenta j1 and j2 we
get all angular momenta between |j1 − j2 | and j1 + j2 , so 0 ⊗ 0 = 0,
0 ⊗ 1 = 1 and 1 ⊗ 1 = 0 ⊕ 1 ⊕ 2. Thus, in the decomposition of a generic
tensor T µν in representations of the rotation group, the j = 0 representation appears twice, the j = 1 representation appears three times, and
the j = 2 once.
It is interesting to see how these representations are shared between
the symmetric traceless, the trace and the antisymmetric part of the
tensor T µν , since these are the irreducible Lorentz representations. The
trace is a Lorentz scalar, so it is in particular scalar under rotations and
therefore is a 0 representation. An antisymmetric tensor Aµν has six
components, which can be written as A0i and (1/2)ijk Ajk . These are
two spatial vectors and therefore
Aµν ∈ 1 ⊕ 1 .

(2.42)

For example, an important antisymmetric tensor in electromagnetism
is the ﬁeld strength tensor Fµν , and in this case the two vectors are
E i = −F 0i and B i = −(1/2)ijk F jk , i.e. the electric and magnetic
ﬁelds. Another example of an antisymmetric tensor is given by the
Lorentz generators J µν themselves; in this case the two spatial vectors
are the angular momentum and the boost generators that have been
introduced in eq. (2.26).
Since we have identiﬁed the trace S with a 0 and Aµν with 1 ⊕ 1,
comparison with eq. (2.41) shows that the nine components of a symmetric traceless tensor S µν decompose, from the point of view of spatial
rotations, as
(2.43)
S µν ∈ 0 ⊕ 1 ⊕ 2 .
Observe that, when in eq. (2.41) we write T µν as (0 ⊕ 1) ⊗ (0 ⊕ 1), the
ﬁrst 0 corresponds to taking the index µ = 0, the ﬁrst 1 corresponds to
taking the index µ = i, and similarly for the second factor (0 ⊕ 1) and
the index ν. Therefore the term (0 ⊗ 0) in eq. (2.41) corresponds to T 00 ,
(0 ⊗ 1) is T 0i , (1 ⊗ 0) is T i0 and (1 ⊗ 1) is T ij . It is clear that T 00 is

Tensor representations 23

24 Lorentz and Poincaré symmetries in QFT

a scalar under spatial rotations, while T 0i and T i0 are spatial vectors.
As for T ij , the antisymmetric part Aij = T ij − T ji is a vector, as can
be seen considering ijk Ajk ; this gives the third 1 representation. The
symmetric part S ij = T ij + T ji can be separated into its trace, which
gives the second 0 representation, and the traceless symmetric part,
which therefore must have j = 2. For example, gravitational waves can
be described by a traceless symmetric spatial tensor (transverse to the
propagation direction) and therefore have spin 2, see Exercise 2.6.
In general, a symmetric tensor with N indices contains angular momenta up to j = N . In four dimensions, higher antisymmetric tensors
are instead less interesting, because the index µ takes only four values
0, . . . , 3 and therefore we cannot antisymmetrize over more than four
indices, otherwise we get zero. Furthermore, a totally antisymmetric
tensor with four indices, Aµνρσ , has only one independent component
A0123 , so it must be a Lorentz scalar. An antisymmetric tensor with
three indices, Aµνρ , has 4 · 3 · 2/3! = 4 components and it has the same
transformation properties of a four-vector.
The last point can be better understood introducing the totally antisymmetric tensor deﬁned as follows. In a given reference frame µνρσ
is deﬁned by 0123 = +1 and by the condition of total antisymmetry,
so it vanishes if any two indices are equal and it changes sign for any
exchange of indices, e.g. 1023 = −1, etc. Normally, if one gives the numerical value of the components of a tensor in a given frame, in another
frame they will be diﬀerent. The  tensor is however special, because
under (proper) Lorentz transformations
  



µνρσ → Λµµ Λν ν  Λρ ρ Λσσ µ ν ρ σ = (det Λ)µνρσ = µνρσ .

(2.44)

So, the components of the  tensor have the same numerical value in all
Lorentz frames. In terms of this tensor, it is immediate to understand
that the four independent components of Aµνρ can be rearranged in a
four-vector Aµ = µνρσ Aνρσ , and that A0123 = (1/4!)µνρσ Aµνρσ is a
scalar.
A tensor which is invariant under all group transformations (i.e. for
the Lorentz group, a tensor which has the same form in all Lorentz
frames) is called an invariant tensor. The only other invariant tensor of
the Lorentz group is ηµν ; its invariance follows from the deﬁning property
of the Lorentz group, eq. (2.13).

2.5

Spinorial representations

2.5.1

Spinors in non-relativistic quantum
mechanics

Tensor representations do not exhaust all physically interesting ﬁnitedimensional representations of the Lorentz group. We can understand
the issue considering spatial rotations, i.e. the SO(3) subgroup of the
Lorentz group. The tensor representations of SO(3) are constructed exactly as before, with scalars φ, spatial vectors v i , tensors T ij , etc. with

2.5

i = 1, 2, 3. However we know from non-relativistic quantum mechanics
that, beside the tensor representations, there are other representations of
great physical interest. These are the spinorial representations. Strictly
speaking, these are not SO(3) representations, because under a rotation of 2π a spinor changes sign, while an SO(3) rotation by 2π is the
same as the identity transformation. However, since the observables are
quadratic in the wave function, this sign ambiguity is perfectly acceptable physically, and these representations must be included. In more
formal terms, this means that, for spatial rotations, the physically relevant group is not SO(3) but rather SU (2).
We recall some facts about SU (2) representations, well known from
non-relativistic quantum mechanics. The Lie algebras of SU (2) and of
SO(3) are the same, and are given by the angular momentum algebra
[J i , J j ] = iijk J k .

(2.45)

From the discussion in Section 2.1, we see that the Lie algebra knows
only about the properties of a group near the identity element, and
the fact that SU (2) and SO(3) have the same Lie algebra means that
they are indistinguishable at the level of inﬁnitesimal transformations.
However, SU (2) and SO(3) diﬀer at the global level, i.e. far from the
identity. In SO(3) a rotation by 2π is the same as the identity. Instead,
it can be shown that SU (2) is periodic only under rotations by 4π. This
means that an object that picks a minus sign under a rotation by 2π
is an acceptable representation of SU (2), while it is not an acceptable
representation of SO(3). Therefore when we consider SU (2) we include
the solutions of eq. (2.45) that correspond to half-integer spin, while
for SO(3) we only retain representations with integer spin. Thus, the
representations of SU (2) are labeled by an index j which takes values
0, 21 , 1, 32 , . . . and gives the spin of the state, in units of . The spin-j
representation has dimension 2j + 1, and the various states within it
are labeled by jz , which takes the values −j, . . . , j in integer steps. The
representation j = 1/2 is called the spinorial representation, and has
dimension 2: on it the J i are represented as
Ji =

σi
,
2

where σ i are the Pauli matrices,




0 1
0 −i
σ1 =
σ2 =
1 0
i 0

(2.46)

σ3 =

1 0
0 −1


.

(2.47)

They satisfy the algebraic identity
σ i σ j = δ ij + iijk σ k ,

(2.48)

from which it follows immediately that σ i /2 obey the commutation relations (2.45).
The spinorial is the fundamental representation of SU (2) since all
representations can be constructed with tensor products of spinors. In

Spinorial representations 25

26 Lorentz and Poincaré symmetries in QFT

physical terms, this means that with spin 1/2 particles we can construct
composite systems with all possible integer or half-integer spin. For
instance, the composition of two spin 1/2 states gives spin zero and spin
1,
1 1
⊗ = 0⊕1.
(2.49)
2 2
If we denote by ↑ and ↓ the j = 1/2 states with jz = +1/2 and jz =
−1/2, respectively, then the three states with j = 1 are given by
(↑↑) ,

1
√ (↑↓ + ↓↑) ,
2

(↓↓)

(2.50)

while the singlet (i.e. the scalar state) is
1
√ (↑↓ − ↓↑) .
2

2.5.2

(2.51)

Spinors in the relativistic theory

We certainly want to keep spinors in the relativistic theory. This means
that we must enlarge the set of representations of the Lorentz group,
compared to the tensor representations discussed above. This is most
easily done starting from the Lorentz algebra in the form given by
eqs. (2.27)−(2.29), and deﬁning
J± =

J ± iK
.
2

(2.52)

The Lie algebra becomes

J +,i , J +,j = iijk J +,k

J −,i , J −,j = iijk J −,k

J +,i , J −,j = 0 .
7

The fact that the Lorentz algebra can
be written as the algebra of SU (2) ×
SU (2) does not mean that the Lorentz
group SO(3, 1) is the same as SU (2) ×
SU (2). First of all, the Lie algebra only
reﬂects the properties of the group close
to the identity. Furthermore, J± are
complex combinations of J and K. Observe that, because of the factor i in
eq. (2.52), a representation of SU (2) ×
SU (2) with J± hermitian induces a representation of SO(3, 1) with J hermitian but K antihermitian. For the more
mathematical reader: SU (2)× SU (2) is
the universal covering group of SO(4)
(similarly to the fact that SU (2) is the
universal covering group of SO(3)) and
SO(4) is the Euclidean version of the
Lorentz group, i.e. it is obtained taking the time variable t purely imaginary. The universal covering group of
SO(3, 1) is SL(2, C).

(2.53)
(2.54)
(2.55)

Therefore we have two copies of the angular momentum algebra, which
commute between themselves.7
Having written the Lorentz group in this form, it is now easy to include
spinorial representations: we simply take all solutions of the algebra
(2.53)−(2.55), including spinor representations.
Since we know the representations of SU (2), and here we have two
commuting SU (2) factors, we ﬁnd that:
• The representations of the Lorentz algebra can be labeled by two
half-integers: (j− , j+ ).
• The dimension of the representation (j− , j+ ) is (2j− + 1)(2j+ + 1).
• The generator of rotations J is related to J+ and J− by J =
J+ + J− ; therefore, by the usual addition of angular momenta in
quantum mechanics, in the representation (j− , j+ ) we have states
with all possible spin j in integer steps between the values |j+ −j− |
and j+ + j− .

2.5

The representations are in general complex and the dimension of the
representation is the number of independent complex components. In
some cases we can impose a reality condition and (2j− + 1)(2j+ + 1) becomes the number of independent real components. The representations
(j− , j+ ) must include all tensor representations discussed in the previous
section, plus spinorial representations. We examine the simplest cases.
(0, 0). This representation has dimension one. On it, J± = 0 so also
J, K are zero. Therefore it is the scalar representation.
( 12 , 0) and (0, 12 ). These representations have both dimension two and
spin 1/2, so they are spinorial representations. We denote by (ψL )α ,
with α = 1, 2, a spinor in (1/2, 0) and by (ψR )α a spinor in (0, 1/2)
(sometimes in the literature the index of ψL is instead denoted by α̇ to
stress that it is an index in a diﬀerent representation compared to the
index of ψR ). ψL is called a left-handed Weyl spinor and ψR is called a
right-handed Weyl spinor :

Weyl spinors:

ψL ∈

1
,0
2


,

ψR ∈



1
0,
.
2

(2.56)

We want to determine the explicit form of the generators J, K on Weyl
spinors. Consider ﬁrst the representation (1/2, 0). By deﬁnition, on this
representation J− is represented by a 2 × 2 matrix, while J+ = 0. The
solution of (2.54) in terms of 2 × 2 matrices is of course J− = σ/2, and
therefore
σ
2
σ
K = −i(J+ − J− ) = i .
2
J = J+ + J− =

(2.57)
(2.58)

Observe that in this representation the generators K i are not hermitian,
in agreement with the comment in note 7. This is a consequence of
the fact that the Lorentz group is non-compact and of the theorem
mentioned on page 16, which states that non-compact groups have no
unitary representations of ﬁnite dimension, except for representations in
which the non-compact generators (in this case the K i ) are represented
trivially, i.e. K i = 0. We can now write explicitly how a Weyl spinor
transforms under Lorentz transformations, using eq. (2.31),

σ
ψL .
ψL → ΛL ψL = exp (−iθ − η) ·
2

(2.59)

Repeating the argument for the (0, 1/2) representation, we ﬁnd again
J = σ/2 but K = −iσ/2 and

σ
ψR .
ψR → ΛR ψR = exp (−iθ + η) ·
(2.60)
2

Spinorial representations 27

28 Lorentz and Poincaré symmetries in QFT

Note that ΛL,R are complex matrices, and therefore necessarily the two
components of a Weyl spinor are complex numbers.
Using the property of the Pauli matrices σ 2 σ i σ 2 = −σ i∗ and the
explicit form of ΛL,R it is easy to show that
σ 2 Λ∗L σ 2 = ΛR .

(2.61)

From this it follows that
∗
∗
∗
σ 2 ψL
= ΛR (σ 2 ψL
)
→ σ 2 (ΛL ψL )∗ = (σ 2 Λ∗L σ 2 )σ 2 ψL

(2.62)

where we used the fact that σ 2 σ 2 = 1. Therefore , if ψL ∈ (1/2, 0), then
∗
σ 2 ψL
is a right-handed Weyl spinor,


1
2 ∗
σ ψL ∈ 0,
.
(2.63)
2
We deﬁne the operation of charge conjugation on Weyl spinors as an
c
deﬁned as
operation that transforms ψL into a new spinor ψL
c
∗
= iσ 2 ψL
.
ψL

(2.64)

Then charge conjugation transforms a left-handed Weyl spinor into a
right-handed one. Taking the complex conjugate of eq. (2.64) and dec
∗
by ψR , we have ψL = −iσ 2 ψR
(having
noting the right-handed spinor ψL
2
2 2
used the fact that σ is purely imaginary and σ σ = 1). Therefore we
deﬁne charge conjugation on a right-handed spinor ψR as
c
∗
ψR
= −iσ 2 ψR
,

(2.65)

so that charge conjugation transforms a right-handed Weyl spinor into
a left-handed one. The factor i in eq. (2.64) is chosen so that, iterating
the transformation twice, we get the identity operation,
c c
∗ c
∗ ∗
) = (iσ 2 ψL
) = −iσ 2 (iσ 2 ψL
) = ψL .
(ψL

(2.66)

We will understand the physical meaning of charge conjugation in Chapter 4.
( 21 , 12 ). This representation has (complex) dimension four and |1/2 −
1/2|  j  1/2 + 1/2, i.e. j = 0, 1. Comparing with eq. (2.40) we
see that it is a complex four-vector representation. A generic element
of the (1/2, 1/2) representation can be written as a pair ((ψL )α , (ξR )β ),
where ψL and ξR are two independent Weyl spinors, left-handed and
right-handed, respectively, and α, β take the values 1, 2. We want to
make explicit the relation between these four (complex) quantities and
the four components of a (complex) four-vector.
First of all, we have seen above that, given a right-handed spinor ξR ,
∗
, and similarly from ψL
we can form a left-handed spinor ξL ≡ −iσ 2 ξR
2 ∗
we can build ψR ≡ iσ ψL . We deﬁne the matrices σ µ and σ̄ µ as
σ µ = (1, σ i ) ,

σ̄ µ = (1, −σ i ) ,

(2.67)

2.6

where σ i are the Pauli matrices and 1 is the 2 × 2 identity matrix. Then,
it is easy to show (see Exercise 2.3) that

and

† µ
ξR
σ ψR

(2.68)

† µ
σ̄ ψL .
ξL

(2.69)

are contravariant four-vectors. These four vectors are by construction
complex. Since the matrix Λµ ν that represents the Lorentz transformation of a four-vector is real, given a complex four-vector V µ it is
consistent with Lorentz invariance to impose on it a reality condition,
Vµ = Vµ∗ because, if we impose it in a given frame, it will remain true in
all Lorentz frames. Therefore we obtain the real four-vector representation.
(1, 0) and (0, 1). These correspond to self-dual and anti-self-dual
antisymmetric tensors Aµν , and each have complex dimension three, i.e.
real dimension six. We discuss them in Exercise 2.5.

2.6

Field representations

Our main motivation for studying Lorentz symmetry is to construct a
Lorentz-invariant ﬁeld theory. A ﬁeld φ(x) is a function of the coordinates with some deﬁnite transformation properties under the Lorentz
group. In general, if
µ
(2.70)
xµ → x = Λµν xν
the ﬁeld φ(x) will transform into a new function of the new coordinates,
φ(x) → φ (x ) .

(2.71)

To deﬁne how a ﬁeld transforms means to state how φ (x ) is related to
φ(x).

2.6.1

Scalar ﬁelds

The simplest possible transformation is that of a scalar ﬁeld,
φ (x ) = φ(x) .

(2.72)

In other words, the numerical value of a scalar ﬁeld at a point is Lorentz
invariant: a point P has coordinates x in a reference frame and x in the
transformed frame, and the functional form of the ﬁeld changes so that
its numerical value in P is the same, independently of how P is labeled.
Consider now an inﬁnitesimal Lorentz transformation
xρ → x = xρ + δxρ
ρ

(2.73)

Field representations 29

30 Lorentz and Poincaré symmetries in QFT

with

i
δxρ = ω ρσ xσ = − ωµν (J µν )ρ σ xσ ,
(2.74)
2
and (J µν )ρ σ = i(η µρ δσν −η νρ δσµ ), as in eqs. (2.23) and (2.24). Under this
transformation δφ ≡ φ (x ) − φ(x) = 0 by deﬁnition. This corresponds
to the fact that the scalar representation gives a trivial representation of
the generators, J µν = 0. However, in the case of ﬁelds we have a more
interesting possibility, namely we can consider an inﬁnitesimal variation
at ﬁxed coordinate x (rather than at a given point P ),
δ0 φ ≡ φ (x) − φ(x) .

(2.75)

To understand the diﬀerence between δφ and δ0 φ we observe that, when
we compute δφ = φ (x ) − φ(x), we are studying how a single degree of
freedom (the ﬁeld evaluated at the point P ) changes when we change the
label of the point P from x to x . However the point P is kept ﬁxed, so
the base space is made by the single degree of freedom φ(P ) and therefore is one-dimensional. More generally, when in the next subsections
we consider spinor or vector ﬁelds, we will see that δψ or δAµ always
provides a ﬁnite-dimensional representation of the generators. For instance the four degrees of freedom Aµ (P ) provide a four-dimensional
base space. Instead, when we compute δ0 φ, we are comparing the ﬁelds
at two diﬀerent space-time points P and P  , so we are comparing different degrees of freedom. The base space now becomes the set of φ(P )
with P varying over all of space-time, or in other words is a space of
functions, and therefore it is an inﬁnite-dimensional base-space. We then
obtain an inﬁnite-dimensional representation of the generators.
To ﬁnd the generators in this representation, we expand eq. (2.75) to
ﬁrst order in δx,
δ0 φ = φ (x − δx) − φ(x) = −δxρ ∂ρ φ(x) .

(2.76)

Using eq. (2.74) for δxρ , this can be rewritten as
i
i
ωµν (J µν )ρ σ xσ ∂ρ φ ≡ − ωµν Lµν φ ,
2
2

(2.77)

Lµν = −(J µν )ρ σ xσ ∂ρ = i(xµ ∂ ν − xν ∂ µ ) .

(2.78)

δ0 φ =
where we deﬁned

We can easily check that the operators Lµν satisfy the Lie algebra (2.25)
and therefore give a representation of the generators of the Lorentz
group. As discussed above, the basis for the representation is the space
of scalar ﬁelds. This is a space of functions, so it is inﬁnite-dimensional,
and therefore this is an inﬁnite-dimensional representation of the Lorentz
algebra. We have not yet speciﬁed what is the scalar product in the ﬁeld
space, so we cannot yet ask whether this representation is unitary. We
postpone the issue to the next chapter.
Recalling that with our metric signature pµ = +i∂ µ (see the Notation), we ﬁnd Lµν = xµ pν − xν pµ . In particular, for spatial rotations
we have Lij = xi pj − xj pi and Li = (1/2)ijk Ljk = ijk xj pk , and we
recognize that Li is the orbital angular momentum.

2.6

2.6.2

Weyl ﬁelds

A left-handed Weyl ﬁeld ψL (x) is deﬁned as a ﬁeld that, under xµ →
µ
x = Λµν xν , transforms as

ψL (x) → ψL
(x ) = ΛL ψL (x) ,

(2.79)

with ΛL given by eq. (2.59). Similarly a right-handed Weyl ﬁeld ψR
transforms with ΛR given in eq. (2.60). In the classical theory we will
consider ψL , ψR as ordinary, commuting, c-numbers.
The representation of the Lorentz generators on ψL can be found
computing


δ0 ψL ≡ ψL
(x) − ψL (x) = ψL
(x − δx) − ψL (x)

= ψL
(x ) − δxρ ∂ρ ψL (x) − ψL (x)
= (ΛL − 1)ψL (x) − δxρ ∂ρ ψL (x) .

(2.80)

We see that δ0 ψL is made of two parts; one comes from the variation
of the coordinate δxρ and is the same as for scalar ﬁelds. Exactly as in
eqs. (2.76) and (2.77), we have
i
−δxρ ∂ρ ψL = − ωµν Lµν ψL ,
2

(2.81)

with Lµν given in eq. (2.78). We write ΛL in the form
ΛL = e− 2 ωµν S
i

µν

.

(2.82)

Then eq. (2.80) becomes
i
δ0 ψL = − ωµν J µν ψL
2

(2.83)

J µν = Lµν + S µν .

(2.84)

with
Comparing eq. (2.82) with eq. (2.59) we see that
Si =

1 ijk jk
σi
 S =
,
2
2

while

(2.85)

σi
.
(2.86)
2
We recognize in eq. (2.84) the separation of the angular momentum into
the orbital and the spin contributions. It is clear that this separation is
completely general, and holds for any representation. The orbital part
Lµν always has the form (2.78) independently of the representation,
while S µν depends on the speciﬁc representation used. For instance,
for right-handed Weyl ﬁelds S i are still given by eq. (2.85) while S i0 =
−iσ i /2, as we see from eq. (2.60).
S i0 = i

Field representations 31

32 Lorentz and Poincaré symmetries in QFT

2.6.3

8

More precisely, this is the Dirac ﬁeld
written in the chiral basis, see Section 3.4.2.

Dirac ﬁelds

Consider a parity transformation (t, x) → (t, −x). Under this operation
the boost generators behave as true vectors and change sign, K → −K,
since the parity transformation reverses the velocity v of the boost. The
angular momentum generator is instead a pseudovector, J → J. Therei
i
i
generators, J+
↔ J−
. This
fore a parity operation exchanges the J±
means that under a parity transformation an object in the (j− , j+ ) representation is transformed into an object in the (j+ , j− ) representation.
Therefore the representation (j− , j+ ) of the Lorentz group is not at the
same time a basis for a representation of the parity transformation, unless j− = j+ . In particular, ψL and ψR , separately, are not a basis for a
representation of the parity transformation.
In Nature, we know experimentally that parity is violated by weak
interactions. At the theoretical level, this is reﬂected in the fact that in
the Standard Model the left and right-handed components of the spin
1/2 particles enter the theory in a very diﬀerent way, as we will see in
Chapter 8. However, we saw in Section 1.2 that the typical scale of weak
interactions is O(100) GeV, much higher than the scale of strong and
of electromagnetic interactions. At suﬃciently low energies, therefore,
the eﬀect of weak interactions is small, and the dominant contributions
come from the electromagnetic and the strong interactions, which both
conserve parity. In this case, it is convenient to work with ﬁelds which
provide a representation of Lorentz and parity transformations. We then
deﬁne a Dirac ﬁeld as8

Ψ=

ψL
ψR


.

(2.87)

A Dirac ﬁeld therefore has four complex components, and it provides a
basis for a representation of both Lorentz and parity transformations.
In fact, under a Lorentz transformation, Ψ → ΛD Ψ with


ΛL 0
ΛD =
,
(2.88)
0 ΛR
9

In Section 3.4.2, after introducing the
Dirac matrices, we will see how to write
ΛD in terms of the commutator of Dirac
matrices, and the result will be independent of the chiral basis that we have
used here.

and ΛL , ΛR given in eqs. (2.59) and (2.60).9 Under a parity transformation P the coordinates change as xµ → x µ = (t, −x) while




ψL (x)
ψR (x )
→
(2.89)
ψR (x)
ψL (x )
and therefore


Ψ(x) →

0
1

1
0



Ψ(x ) .

(2.90)

When we study the quantized Dirac ﬁeld we will examine the possibility
and the meaning of an overall phase η = ±1 in the transformation law
(2.90), see Section 4.2.3.

2.6

In eqs. (2.64) and (2.65) we deﬁned the operation of charge conjugation on Weyl spinors. Given a Dirac spinor Ψ as in eq. (2.87), charge
conjugation allows us to deﬁne a new Dirac spinor




∗
−iσ 2 ψR
0
σ2
c
(2.91)
Ψ∗ .
Ψ =
= −i
∗
iσ 2 ψL
−σ 2 0
and, as for Weyl spinors, iterating charge conjugation twice one ﬁnds
the identity transformation,
(Ψc )c = Ψ .

(2.92)

Note that the coordinates xµ are unchanged under charge conjugation.
We will understand the importance of charge conjugation when we quantize the theory and we will ﬁnd particles and antiparticles.
Dirac spinors are the basic objects in quantum electrodynamics (QED).
Since QED preserves parity and charge conjugation, the Weyl spinors
always appear in the combination Ψ. On Ψ parity is a well-deﬁned operation, and we can use it to construct a parity-invariant theory while,
having for instance only ψL at our disposal, it is impossible to build a
theory invariant under parity. We will see that in the Standard Model,
parity and charge conjugation are not symmetries and ψL , ψR appear
separately, in a non-symmetric way. Therefore, Weyl spinors are more
fundamental objects than Dirac spinors.

2.6.4

Majorana ﬁelds

A Majorana spinor is a Dirac spinor in which ψL and ψR are not inde∗
pendent, but rather ψR = iσ 2 ψL
,


ψL
ΨM =
.
(2.93)
∗
iσ 2 ψL
So, it has the same number of degrees of freedom as a Weyl spinor,
although it is written in the form of a Dirac spinor. From this deﬁnition
it follows that a Majorana spinor is invariant under charge conjugation
ΨcM = ΨM .

(2.94)

Observe that, if we have a complex scalar ﬁeld φ(x), we can impose
on it a reality condition φ(x) = φ∗ (x), and this is a Lorentz-invariant
condition: since φ and φ∗ are both Lorentz invariant, if we impose φ = φ∗
in a frame, we will have φ = φ∗ in any other frame. The same is true
for the four-vector representation, as we already discussed on page 29.
For a Dirac spinor Ψ the situation is diﬀerent; Ψ is a complex ﬁeld,
and the condition Ψ = Ψ∗ is not Lorentz invariant, since the matrix
ΛD in eq. (2.88) is not real. Therefore, if we impose the relation Ψ =
Ψ∗ in a frame, it will not hold in general in another Lorentz frame.
Instead, the condition (2.94) is by construction Lorentz invariant, since
it is a consequence of the deﬁnition (2.93), which in turns expresses the

Field representations 33

34 Lorentz and Poincaré symmetries in QFT
∗
Lorentz-invariant statement that iσ 2 ψL
is a right-handed spinor. Since
c
ΨM involves complex conjugation, see eq. (2.91), the condition (2.94) is
a Lorentz-invariant relation between Ψ and Ψ∗ , and in this sense it is
called a reality condition.
So we can see Majorana ﬁelds as “real” Dirac ﬁelds, with respect to
the only possible Lorentz-invariant reality condition, eq. (2.94).
It is possible that Majorana spinors play an important role in the
description of the neutrino. We will come to this issue later.

2.6.5

Vector ﬁelds

The deﬁnition of vector ﬁelds at this point is obvious. A (contravariant)
µ
vector ﬁeld V µ (x) is deﬁned as a ﬁeld that, under xµ → x = Λµν xν ,
transforms as
µ
V µ (x) → V  (x ) = Λµν V ν (x) .
(2.95)
From the discussion in Section 2.4.1 we see that a general vector ﬁeld
has a spin-0 and a spin-1 component. An example of a vector ﬁeld that
will be important for us is the gauge ﬁeld Aµ (x) in electromagnetism.
We will see in Section 4.3.1 that Aµ (x) is subject to some conditions,
stemming from gauge invariance, that eliminate the spin-0 component
and the state with (j = 1, jz = 0), where z is the propagation direction.
Since a vector ﬁeld belongs to the (1/2, 1/2) representation, it has
j− = j+ and therefore it is a basis for the representation of parity. A
true vector transform as (V 0 , V) → (V 0 , −V) while a pseudovector (or
axial vector) transforms as (V 0 , V) → (−V 0 , V).
Tensor ﬁelds are deﬁned similarly.

2.7

The Poincaré group

Beside invariance under Lorentz transformations, we require also invariance under space-time translations. A generic element of the translation
group is written as
(2.96)
exp{−iP µ aµ }
where aµ are the parameters of the translation, xµ → xµ + aµ , and
the components of the four-momentum operator P µ are the generators. Translations plus Lorentz transformations form a group, called the
Poincaré group, or the inhomogeneous Lorentz group (it is sometimes
denoted as ISO(3, 1), where “I” stands for inhomogeneous).
Since the translations commute, we have
[P µ , P ν ] = 0 .

(2.97)

To ﬁnd the commutator between P µ and J ρσ we can start from the
commutators

(2.98)
J i , P j = iijk P k ,

i
0
(2.99)
J ,P = 0,

2.7

which express the facts that P i is a vector under rotations and that
the energy is a scalar under rotations. The unique Lorentz-covariant
generalization of eqs. (2.98) and (2.99) is
[P µ , J ρσ ] = i (η µρ P σ − η µσ P ρ ) .

(2.100)

Together with the Lorentz algebra (2.25), eqs. (2.97) and (2.100) deﬁne
the Poincaré algebra. In terms of J i , K i , P 0 = H and P i it reads



J i , J j = iijk J k , J i , K j = iijk K k , J i , P j = iijk P k , (2.101)



K i , K j = −iijk J k , P i , P j = 0 , K i , P j = iHδ ij ,



J i, H = 0 ,
P i, H = 0 ,
K i , H = iP i .

(2.102)
(2.103)

Equations (2.101) express the fact that the J i generate spatial rotations
and K i , P i are vectors under rotations. Equations (2.103) state that J i
and P i commute with the generator of time translations and therefore
are conserved quantities; the K i instead are not conserved, and this is
the reason why the eigenvalues of K are not used for labeling physical
states.

2.7.1

Representation on ﬁelds

We saw in Section 2.6 that ﬁelds provide an inﬁnite-dimensional representation of the Lorentz group, and that on ﬁelds the generators J µν are
represented as
(2.104)
J µν = Lµν + S µν
where
Lµν = i(xµ ∂ ν − xν ∂ µ )

(2.105)

and S µν depends on the spin of the ﬁeld in question, but not on the
coordinates xµ . To obtain a representation of the full Poincaré group
on ﬁelds, we must now ﬁnd how to represent the four-momentum operator P µ , i.e. we have to specify the transformation law of ﬁelds under
translations.
We require that all ﬁelds, independently of their transformation property under the Lorentz group, behave as scalars under space-time translation. Let us label by φ a generic ﬁeld, either a Lorentz scalar ﬁeld,
or a component of a spinor ﬁeld ξα with α given, or a given component
V µ of a vector ﬁeld, etc. Then, under a translation x → x = x + a, all
ﬁelds, independently of their Lorentz properties, transform as
φ (x ) = φ(x) .

(2.106)

Under an inﬁnitesimal translation xµ → xµ = xµ + µ we have, to ﬁrst
order in ,
δ0 φ ≡ φ (x) − φ(x) = φ (x − ) − φ(x) = −µ ∂µ φ(x) .

(2.107)

The Poincaré group 35

36 Lorentz and Poincaré symmetries in QFT

On the other hand, from the form (2.96) of the translation operator, it
follows that
φ (x − ) = e−iP (− µ ) φ (x ) = ei µ P φ(x)
µ

µ

(2.108)

and therefore to ﬁrst order in 
δ0 φ = iµ P µ φ(x) .

(2.109)

Comparing eqs. (2.107) and (2.109) we see that the momentum operator
is represented as
P µ = +i∂ µ .
(2.110)
Therefore
H=i

∂
∂
=i ,
0
∂x
∂t

P i = i∂ i = −i∂i = −i

∂
.
∂xi

(2.111)

The explicit form of J µν and of P µ has been found requiring that the
ﬁelds have well-deﬁned transformation properties under the Poincaré
group; therefore these explicit expressions must automatically satisfy
the Poincaré algebra. We can check this easily observing that S µν does
not depend on the coordinates and therefore commutes with ∂ µ , while
[∂ µ , xν ] = η µν . Therefore
[P µ , J ρσ ] = [i∂ µ , i(xρ ∂ σ − xσ ∂ ρ )] = −η µρ ∂ σ + η µσ ∂ ρ
= i (η µρ P σ − η µσ P ρ ) ,

(2.112)

in agreement with eq. (2.100). The commutator [P µ , P ν ] = 0 is also satisﬁed by P µ = i∂ µ and we already know that the commutator [J µν , J ρσ ]
is correctly reproduced, so the full Poincaré algebra is obeyed.

2.7.2

10

Actually there is also the possibility of an anti-unitary operator; the
only symmetry transformation where
this happens is time-reversal, and we
postpone the deﬁnition of anti-unitary
operators to Chapter 4.

Representation on one-particle states

The representation of the Poincaré group on ﬁelds allows us to construct
Poincaré invariant Lagrangians, as we will study in the next chapter. At
the classical level, a Lagrangian description is all that we need in order
to specify the dynamics of the system. At the quantum level, however, one of our aims will be to understand how the concept of particle
emerges from ﬁeld quantization. It is therefore useful to see how the
Poincaré group can be represented using as a basis the Hilbert space
of a free particle. We will denote the states of a free particle with momentum p as |p , s , where s labels collectively all other quantum numbers. Since p is a continuous and unbounded variable, this base space
is inﬁnite-dimensional. A theorem by Wigner (see Weinberg (1995),
Chapter 2) states that on this Hilbert space any symmetry transformation can be represented by a unitary operator.10 Therefore in this base
space a Poincaré transformation is represented by a unitary matrix, and
the generators J i , K i , P i and H by hermitian operators.
The representations are labeled by the Casimir operators. One is
easily found, and is Pµ P µ . On a one-particle state it has the value m2 ,

2.7

The Poincaré group 37

where m is the mass of the particle. Using the commutation relations of
the Poincaré group one can verify that there is a second Casimir operator
given by Wµ W µ , where
1
W µ = − µνρσ Jνρ Pσ
2

(2.113)

is called the Pauli–Lubanski four-vector. To prove that Wµ W µ is a
Casimir operator is straightforward. First of all, W µ is clearly a fourvector, so Wµ W µ is Lorentz-invariant and therefore commutes with J µν .
From the explicit form it also follows that
[W µ , P ν ] = 0 ,

(2.114)

(using eq. (2.100) and the antisymmetry of µνρσ ), and then Wµ W µ
commutes also with P ν .
Since Wµ W µ is Lorentz-invariant, we can compute it in the frame
that we prefer. If m = 0, it is convenient to choose the rest frame of
the particle; in this frame W µ = (−m/2)µνρ0 Jνρ = (m/2)0µνρ Jνρ , so
W 0 = 0 while
m
m
W i = 0ijk J jk = ijk J jk = mJ i .
(2.115)
2
2
Therefore on a one-particle state with mass m and spin j we have
−Wµ W µ = m2 j(j + 1) ,

(m = 0) .

(2.116)

If instead m = 0 the rest frame does not exist, but we can choose a frame
where P µ = (ω, 0, 0, ω); in this frame a straightforward computation
gives W 0 = W 3 = ωJ 3 , W 1 = ω(J 1 − K 2 ) and W 2 = ω(J 2 + K 1 ).
Therefore
−Wµ W µ = ω 2 [(K 2 − J 1 )2 + (K 1 + J 2 )2 ] ,

(m = 0) .

(2.117)

Comparing eqs. (2.116) and (2.117) we see that the limit m → 0 is
quite subtle, and we must study separately the massive and massless
representations.
Massive representations: In this case on the one-particle states
we have P µ Pµ = m2 while Wµ W µ = −m2 j(j + 1). We will restrict to
m real11 and positive. Therefore the representations are labeled by the
mass m and by the spin j. We can understand this better observing
that, if m = 0, with a Lorentz transformation we can bring P µ into
the form P µ = (m, 0, 0, 0). This choice of P µ still leaves us with the
freedom of performing spatial rotations. In other words, the space of
one-particle states with momentum P µ = (m, 0, 0, 0) is still a basis for
the representation of spatial rotations. The group of transformations
which leaves invariant a given choice of P µ is called the little group.
In this case, since we want to include spinor representations, the little
group is SU (2). The massive representations are therefore labeled by
the mass m and by the spin j = 0, 1/2, 1, . . ., and states within each

11

In principle there is also the possibility of representations with m2 < 0,
known as tachyons. In ﬁeld theory the
emergence of a tachyonic mode is the
signal of an instability, and reﬂects the
fact that we have expanded around the
wrong vacuum, e.g. around a maximum rather than a minimum of a potential.

38 Lorentz and Poincaré symmetries in QFT

representation are labeled by jz = −j, −j + 1, . . . , j. This means that
massive particles of spin j have 2j + 1 degrees of freedom.
Massless representations: When P 2 = 0 the rest frame does not
exist, but we can reduce P µ to the form P µ = (ω, 0, 0, ω). The little
group is the set of Poincaré transformations that leaves this vector unchanged. One sees immediately that the rotations in the (x, y) plane
leave this P µ invariant; this is an SO(2) group, generated by J 3 .
This part is more technical and can be
omitted at a ﬁrst reading. Just assume
that the little group is SO(2) and skip
the part written in smaller characters.

Furthermore there are two less evident Lorentz transformations that do
not change P µ ; to ﬁnd the most general solution, it is suﬃcient to restrict to
inﬁnitesimal Lorentz transformations Λµ ν = δνµ +ω µ ν , and to look for the most
general matrix ω µν which satisﬁes ω µν = −ω νµ (in order to have a Lorentz
transformation) and
(2.118)
ω µν Pν = 0 ,
for Pν = (ω, 0, 0, −ω). Therefore
10
0
1
ω 02
ω 03
1
0
ω 01
B
B −ω 01
C
0
ω 12
ω 13 C
CB 0 C = 0,
B
(2.119)
23 A @
@ −ω 02 −ω 12
0
ω
0 A
03
13
23
−ω
−ω
−ω
0
−1
which gives ω 03 = 0, ω 01 + ω 13 = 0 and ω 02 + ω 23 = 0. Denoting ω 01 = α,
ω 02 = β and ω 12 = θ we see that the most general Lorentz transformation
that leaves P µ invariant can be written as
Λ = e−i(αA+βB+θC)
where (lowering the second Lorentz index)
0
1
0
0
−1 0 0
0
B −1
C
B 0
0
0
1
µ
µ
C , B ν = iB
A ν = iB
@ 0
@ −1
0
0 0 A
0
−1 0 0
0

(2.120)
0
0
0
0

−1
0
0
−1

1
0
0 C
C
1 A
0

(2.121)

0

1
0 0
0
0
B 0 0 −1 0 C
C.
C µν = i B
(2.122)
@ 0 1
0
0 A
0 0
0
0
Comparison with eq. (2.23) shows that C µ ν is nothing but (J 3 )µ ν , i.e. the
explicit expression of J 3 as a 4 × 4 matrix in the four-vector representation.
Similarly we ﬁnd that Aµ ν = (K 1 + J 2 )µ ν and B µ ν = (K 2 − J 1 )µ ν . These
are just the combinations that appear in eq. (2.117), so in the massless case
and

−Wµ W µ = ω 2 (A2 + B 2 ) .

12
They would be hermitian if we write
them as Aµν , B µν and C µν . However,
δxρ is proportional to ωµν (J µν )ρ σ xσ ,
so the representation is provided by the
matrices with one upper and one lower
index, and it is for these matrices that
the algebra (2.124) holds.

(2.123)

Using the commutation rules of the Lorentz group, or directly the explicit
expressions given above, one ﬁnds that the operators J 3 , A and B close an
algebra:
[J 3 , B] = −iA ,
[A, B] = 0 .
(2.124)
[J 3 , A] = +iB ,
x
y
Formally this is the same algebra generated by the operators p , p and Lz =
xpy − ypx, which describe the translations and rotations of a Euclidean plane,
with A and B playing the role of the translation operators. This algebra is
denoted by ISO(2). The matrices Aµ ν and B µ ν given in eq. (2.121) are not
hermitian.12 This is as it should be, since they are 4×4 matrices, and therefore
are a ﬁnite-dimensional representation of non-compact Lorentz generators.

2.7

The Poincaré group 39

We can however represent the algebra (2.124) taking as the base space the
one-particle states with momentum p. In this representation A and B are hermitian operators because of Wigner’s theorem and, since they are commuting,
they can be diagonalized simultaneously. We denote by a, b the respective
eigenvalues. Then
A|p ; a, b = a|p ; a, b ,

B|p ; a, b = b|p ; a, b .

(2.125)

However, if a and b are non-zero, we can now ﬁnd a continuous set of eigenvalues! Consider in fact the state
3

|p ; a, b, θ ≡ e−iθJ |p ; a, b ,

(2.126)

with θ an arbitrary angle. We have
3

A e−iθJ |p ; a, b = e−iθJ

3

“

3

eiθJ Ae−iθJ

3

”

|p ; a, b .

(2.127)

Using the commutation rules (2.124) we ﬁnd that
3

3

eiθJ Ae−iθJ = A cos θ − B sin θ

(2.128)

(this can be proved expanding the exponentials in power series) and therefore
A|p ; a, b, θ = (a cos θ − b sin θ)|p ; a, b, θ ,

(2.129)

B|p ; a, b, θ = (a sin θ + b cos θ)|p ; a, b, θ .

(2.130)

and similarly
This means that, unless a = b = 0, we ﬁnd representations corresponding
to massless particles with a continuous internal degree of freedom θ. These
representations do not so far ﬁnd physical applications, and we therefore
restrict to states with a = b = 0. Since for massless particles we found
−Wµ W µ = ω 2 (A2 + B 2 ), on these states (and only on these states) we have
−Wµ W µ = 0, which agrees with the m → 0 limit of eq. (2.116). On the states
with a = b = 0 the little group is simply SO(2) or, equivalently, U (1).

As for any abelian group, the irreducible representations of SO(2)
are one-dimensional. The generator of the group SO(2) of rotations in
the (x, y) plane is the angular momentum J 3 and therefore the onedimensional representations are labeled by the eigenvalue h of J 3 ; it
represents the angular momentum in the direction of propagation of the
particle (in this case, the z axis), and is called the helicity.
It can be shown that h is quantized, h = 0, ±1/2, ±1, . . .. Actually,
there is a subtle technical point in the quantization of h: the elementary
proof that, for SU (2), jz is quantized is of an algebraic nature. One deﬁnes λm = j, m+1|(Jx +iJy )|jm and, using the commutation relations
between the three Ji , one ﬁnds a recursion relation |λm−1 |2 −|λm |2 = 2m.
The condition that this recursion relation does not produce a negative
|λm |2 provides the quantization of m = jz .13 In the case of the little
group of massless particles we do not have Jx , Jy at our disposal, but
only the single SO(2) generator Jz and therefore this algebraic proof
does not go through. There is however a topological proof, based on the
fact that the universal covering of the Lorentz group is SL(2, C); this
is a double covering, therefore any Lorentz rotation by 4π is the same

13
See any book on quantum mechanics, e.g. L. Schiﬀ, Quantum Mechanics,
third edition, McGraw-Hill, New York
1968, eq. (27.23).

40 Lorentz and Poincaré symmetries in QFT

as the identity matrix. A detailed discussion can be found in Weinberg
(1995), pages 86–90.
This analysis shows that massless particles have only one degree of
freedom, and are characterized by the value h of their helicity. On a
state of helicity h, a U (1) rotation of the little group is represented by
U (θ) = exp{−ihθ} .

(2.131)

From the point of view of the representations of the Poincaré group, a
massless particle with helicity +h and a massless particle with helicity
−h are logically two diﬀerent species of particles, since they belong to
two diﬀerent representations of the Poincaré group. However, the helicity is the projection of the angular momentum along the direction of
motion, so it can be written as
h = p̂ · J

(2.132)

where p̂ is the unit vector in the direction of propagation. We see from
eq. (2.132) that the helicity is a pseudoscalar, i.e. it changes sign under
parity. If the interaction conserves parity, to each particle of helicity h
there must correspond another particle with helicity −h, and these two
helicity states must enter into the theory in a symmetric way. Since the
electromagnetic interaction conserves parity, it is more natural to deﬁne
the photon as a representation of the Poincaré group and of parity, i.e.
to assemble together the two states of helicity h = ±1. The two states
h = ±1 are then referred to as left-handed (h = −1) and right-handed
(h = +1) photons.
Similarly the two states with helicity h = ±2 that mediate the gravitational interaction are better considered as two polarization states of
the same particle, the graviton:
Photon: m2 = 0, two polarization states h = ±1.
Graviton: m2 = 0, two polarization states h = ±2.
On the contrary, neutrinos have only weak interactions (apart from the
much smaller gravitational interaction), which do not conserve parity,
and the two states with helicity h = ±1/2 are given diﬀerent names:
neutrino is reserved for h = −1/2, and antineutrino for h = +1/2.

Summary of chapter
In this chapter we have introduced a number of mathematical tools
that will greatly simplify our construction of classical and quantum ﬁeld
theories in the next chapters. We recall some important points.
• Lie group, Lie algebras and their representations have been discussed in Section 2.1. They are central concepts in modern theoretical physics, independently of our applications to the Lorentz
and Poincaré group. Basically, Lie groups are the correct language
for describing continuous symmetries.

2.7

The Poincaré group 41

• The Lorentz group is generated by rotations and boosts, and its
algebra is given in eqs. (2.27)−(2.29). We have discussed its tensor
representations in Section 2.4 and its spinorial representations in
Section 2.5. This leads in particular to the introduction of Weyl
spinors, eq. (2.56); Dirac spinors are obtained assembling a lefthanded and a right-handed Weyl spinor, and are a representation
of Lorentz and of parity transformations.
• Fields are functions of the coordinates with well-deﬁned transformation properties under Poincaré transformations. Depending on
their transformation properties under the Lorentz group, we have
scalar ﬁelds, Weyl ﬁelds, Dirac ﬁelds, vector ﬁelds, etc.
• The study of the representations of the Poincaré group using as
base space the Hilbert space of one-particle states leads to massive
particles, characterized by the spin j and having 2j + 1 degrees of
freedom, and massless particles, which have one degree of freedom
and a deﬁnite helicity h. For the photon and for the graviton, parity considerations suggest assembling the two states with helicity
h = ±1 (for the photon) and h = ±2 (for the graviton) into a
single particle.

Further reading
• For Weyl and Dirac spinors see Ramond (1990),
Chapter 1 and Peskin and Schroeder (1995), Chapter 3. Observe that our deﬁnitions of ψL and ψR
are inverted compared to Ramond (but agree with
Peskin and Schroeder). In particular, for us the
boost generator on ψL is +iσ/2 while for Ramond
is −iσ/2 and as a consequence for us the four† µ
σ̄ ψL ,
vector made with left-handed spinors is ξL
† µ
σ ψL
see eq. (2.69), while for Ramond it is ξL
(the fact that we both say that ψL belongs to the
(1/2, 0) representation is due to the fact that we
write (j− , j+ ) while Ramond writes (j+ , j− )). In
the next chapter we will see that with our deﬁni-

tion ψL has helicity −1/2 (and therefore with the
deﬁnition of Ramond it has h = +1/2).
• A very clear book on Lie groups for physicists is
Georgi (1999). The second edition contains many
improvements of the already ‘classical’ ﬁrst edition.
For a more geometrical approach to Lie groups, see,
e.g., Nakahara (1990), Section 5.6. An advanced
book is J. Fuchs and C. Schweigert, Symmetries,
Lie Algebras and Representations, Cambridge University Press 1997.
• For the representations of the Poincaré group see
Sections 2.4 and 2.5 of Weinberg (1995).

Exercises
(2.1) Consider a massive particle moving with velocity
v = tanh η. Show that, if E is the energy of the
particle and p its momentum along the propaga-

tion direction, then
η=

E+p
1
log
,
2
E−p

(2.133)

42 Lorentz and Poincaré symmetries in QFT
and verify that, under a boost in the direction of
motion with velocity v  , η transforms additively:
η → η + arctanh(v  ). Therefore dη is invariant under longitudinal boosts.
(2.2) Show that a totally symmetric and traceless spatial
tensor T i1 ...iN with N spatial indices has angular
momentum j = N . Discuss some physically interesting examples.
(2.3) Prove that, if ψR and ξR are right-handed Weyl
† µ
σ ψR is a four-vector, and similarly for
spinors, ξR
† µ
σ̄ ψL , where ξL and ψL are left-handed Weyl
ξL
spinors.
(2.4) Find the explicit form of the variation of an
antisymmetric tensor F µν under an inﬁnitesimal
Lorentz transformation. Writing F 0i = −E i and
F ij = − ijk B k , ﬁnd the inﬁnitesimal transformation of E i and B i .
(2.5) Consider an antisymmetric tensor Aµν . (i) Prove
that, with Minkowski signature η µν , if we try to
impose the condition Aµν = (1/2) µνρσ Aρσ , or the
condition Aµν = −(1/2) µνρσ Aρσ , then the only
solution is Aµν = 0.
(ii) Repeat the same exercise in a Euclidean space
with metric δ µν . A Euclidean tensor is called
self-dual if Aµν = (1/2) µνρσ Aρσ , or anti-self-dual
if Aµν = −(1/2) µνρσ Aρσ . Verify that self-dual
and anti-self-dual tensors are irreducible representations of (real) dimension three of the Euclidean
group SO(4), and verify that the six-dimensional
representation Aµν of SO(4) decomposes into its
self-dual and anti-self-dual parts.
(iii) With Minkowski signature, an antisymmetric
tensor Aµν with complex components is called selfdual if Aµν = (i/2) µνρσ Aρσ and anti-self-dual if

Aµν = −(i/2) µνρσ Aρσ . Prove that the self-dual
and anti-self-dual parts are irreducible representations of the Lorentz group of complex dimension
three (i.e. real dimension six) and identify these
representations with the appropriate (j− , j+ ) representations.
(iv) Write the Maxwell tensor F µν as a sum of a
self-dual and anti-self-dual part. Realize that a real
antisymmetric tensor, such as F µν , is an irreducible
representation of SO(3, 1).
(2.6) (i) A classical electromagnetic wave propagating in
the direction n̂ = (0, 0, 1) is described by the linear
polarization vectors e1 = (1, 0, 0) and e2 = (0, 1, 0).
Deﬁne the circular polarizations as e± = e1 ± ie2 .
Compute the transformation of e± under a rotation
in the (x, y) plane and conclude that electromagnetic waves are made of massless spin-1 particles.
(ii) A classical gravitational wave propagating in
the direction n̂ is described by a polarization tensor hij symmetric, traceless, and transverse to the
propagation direction, n̂i hij = 0, i.e. (setting
n̂ = ẑ) by a matrix of the general form
0

h+
hij = @ h×
0

h×
−h+
0

1
0
0 A,
0

(2.134)

and h+,× are called the plus and cross polarizations, respectively. Compute the transformation
properties of h+,× under a rotation in the (x, y)
plane, and the transformation properties of the circular polarization tensors h× ± ih+ . Conclude that
gravitational waves are made of massless spin-2
particles.

Classical ﬁeld theory
In the previous chapter we deﬁned our basic objects, the ﬁelds. We
now introduce their dynamics, ﬁrst of all at the classical level. We
will discuss the Lagrangian and the Hamiltonian formalism and we will
present the Noether theorem, which provides the relation between symmetries and conservation laws. We will see that at the classical level
the ﬁelds obey relativistic wave equations, such as the Klein–Gordon,
Dirac, and Maxwell equations. Finally, even if it is a subject logically
distinct from classical ﬁeld theory, we will include in this chapter a discussion of the ﬁrst quantization of the relativistic wave equations and
we will see that, despite the intrinsic limitations of the method, this can
nevertheless be useful to compute the lowest-order relativistic corrections to the Schrödinger equation. In the Solved Problems section we
will present some explicit computations using ﬁrst quantized relativistic
wave equations, and in particular we will compute the ﬁne structure of
the hydrogen atom using the Dirac equation.

3.1

The action principle

We ﬁrst brieﬂy recall the basic principles of classical mechanics in the
Lagrangian formalism. A classical system with N degrees of freedom
is described by a set of coordinates qi (t), with i = 1, . . . , N , which we
often denote collectively simply as q. The Lagrangian L is a function
of the qi ’s and of their ﬁrst time derivatives q̇i , i.e. L = L(q, q̇); in
the simplest
 case it is given by a kinetic term minus a potential term,
L(q, q̇) = i (mi /2)q̇i2 − V (q). The action S is

S = dt L(q, q̇) .
(3.1)
The action principle states that, if we ﬁx the values of the coordinates at
the initial time tin and at the ﬁnal time tf , so that q(tin ) = qin , q(tf ) = qf ,
then the classical trajectory which satisﬁes these boundary conditions is
an extremum of the action,
 tf
dt L(q, q̇) = 0 .
(3.2)
δ
tin

The variation is performed holding ﬁxed the boundary conditions, i.e.
one must ﬁnd the function q(t) which extremizes the action, within the
space of functions that satisfy q(tin ) = qin , q(tf ) = qf . The variation of

3
3.1 The action principle

43

3.2 Noether’s theorem

46

3.3 Scalar ﬁelds

51

3.4 Spinor ﬁelds

54

3.5 The electromagnetic ﬁeld

65

3.6 First quantization

73

3.7 Solved problems

74

44 Classical ﬁeld theory

the Lagrangian is
δL =

 ∂L
i

1

This can be understood discretizing
this functional space (for instance taking t discrete rather than continuous),
so that it becomes a ﬁnite-dimensional
space, described by a ﬁnite number of
parameters that we denote collectively
by α. Then δqi = (∂qi /∂α)δα becomes
an ordinary variation of a function of a
ﬁnite number of variables α and of time,
and similarly δq̇i = (∂ q̇i /∂α)δα; on a
suﬃciently regular function q(α, t) we
can interchange the derivatives with re∂ ∂qi
spect to t and to α, δq̇i = ∂α
( ∂t )δα =
∂ ∂qi
∂
(
)δα = ∂t δqi .
∂t ∂α

∂qi

δqi +

∂L
δ q̇i .
∂ q̇i

(3.3)

δqi , δ q̇i are variations in the space of functions of t (with the given boundary conditions), and therefore in an inﬁnite-dimensional space. The time
derivative commutes1 with the variation operator δ,
δ q̇i =

∂
δqi .
∂t

The variation of the action then becomes
 tf
  ∂L
∂L ∂
δS =
δqi = 0 .
δqi +
dt
∂qi
∂ q̇i ∂t
tin
i

(3.4)

(3.5)

Integrating the second term by parts, the boundary term does not
contribute because the boundary conditions are held ﬁxed: δqi (tin ) =
δqi (tf ) = 0. Therefore we get
 tf
  ∂L
∂ ∂L
δqi = 0 .
dt
(3.6)
−
∂qi
∂t ∂ q̇i
tin
i
This must be true for any functional form of the variations δqi (we are
considering systems which are not subject to constraints, therefore all
qi are independent), so we obtain the Euler–Lagrange equations,
∂L
∂ ∂L
−
= 0,
∂qi
∂t ∂ q̇i

(3.7)

with i = 1, . . . , N . These are the equations of motion in the Lagrangian
formulation.
In order to pass to the Hamiltonian formalism, one deﬁnes the conjugate momenta
∂L
pi =
,
(3.8)
∂ q̇i
and the Hamiltonian

H(p, q) =
pi q̇i − L ,
(3.9)
i

where q̇i is expressed in terms of pi and possibly qi using eq. (3.8).
In the previous chapter we introduced the ﬁelds, deﬁned as functions
of the space-time point x with given transformation properties under
the Poincaré group. The classical dynamics of a ﬁeld can be deﬁned
extending the Lagrangian formalism from the case of functions of time,
qi (t), to the case of functions of space-time φi (x). We will only be
interested in local ﬁeld theories, in which case the Lagrangian has the
general form

(3.10)
L = d3 x L(φ, ∂µ φ) ,

3.1

where L is called the Lagrangian density (however, following standard
use in ﬁeld theory, we will often refer to L simply as the Lagrangian)
and depends only on a ﬁnite number of derivatives. We will often denote
collectively the ﬁelds φi simply as φ. To make contact with the variables
qi (t) of classical mechanics, we can think of φi (t, x ) as functions of time
labeled both by the index i and by the continuous label x (the analogy
becomes exact if we discretize space and we put the system in a ﬁnite
box). In most cases of interest, L depends only on the ﬁrst derivative.2 In
a Lorentz-covariant theory L depends on the time and space derivatives
of φ only through the four-vector ∂µ φ. For the moment we do not assume
anything about the transformation properties of the ﬁeld, so for instance
φi could denote a set of scalars, or the four components of a vector ﬁeld,
etc. The action has the general form


S = dt L = d4 x L(φ, ∂µ φ) .
(3.11)
While for point particles we considered the time integral between two values tin , tf , in classical ﬁeld theory we will rather be interested in the situation where the integral extends over all of space-time, and the boundary
conditions are that all ﬁelds decrease suﬃciently fast at inﬁnity so that,
in particular, all boundary terms can be neglected.
The classical dynamics is again deﬁned by the principle that the action
is stationary. The same manipulations performed above in the case of a
function q(t) are immediately generalized to the case of a function φ(x),
and

  ∂L
∂L
4
δ(∂µ φi )
δφi +
δS = d x
∂φ
∂(∂
i
µ φi )
i

  ∂L
∂L
= d4 x
− ∂µ
(3.12)
δφi = 0 .
∂φ
∂(∂
i
µ φi )
i
Therefore the equations of motion, or Euler–Lagrange equations, are
∂L
∂L
= 0,
− ∂µ
∂φi
∂(∂µ φi )

(3.13)

with i = 1, . . . , N . Consider now the theory obtained replacing the
original Lagrangian density L by a new Lagrangian density L which
diﬀers from L only by a four-divergence,
L = L + ∂µ K µ ,
µ

(3.14)

µ

with K = K (φ). In a ﬁnite volume V bounded by a surface Σ we
have, by Stokes theorem,


d4 x ∂µ K µ =
dA nµ K µ ,
(3.15)
V

Σ

where dA is the surface element and nµ is the outward normal to the
surface. This is a boundary term and therefore vanishes on ﬁeld conﬁgurations that go to zero suﬃciently fast at inﬁnity. More generally,

2

The action principle 45

The variational principle can be generalized to Lagrangians containing higher
derivatives.
For instance, if L =
L(q, q̇, q̈), then δL = (δL/δq)δq +
(δL/δq)δ
˙ q̇ + (δL/δq̈)δq̈. At the boundaries we must hold ﬁxed both q and
q̇ and, after integrations by parts,
the equation of motion is (δL/δq) −
d/dt(δL/δq)
˙ + d2 /dt2 (δL/δq̈) = 0.

46 Classical ﬁeld theory

we can consider the variational principle in a ﬁnite four-dimensional volume V but in this case, similarly to the situation discussed in classical
mechanics, in order to have a well-deﬁned variational principle we must
impose the boundary condition
that the ﬁelds are kept constant on Σ.

In any case, the term V d4 x ∂µ K µ either vanishes or is anyway a constant, and therefore the condition that S  is stationary is equivalent to
the condition that S is stationary. This means that two Lagrangian densities which diﬀer by a total derivative give rise to the same equations
of motion and therefore are classically equivalent.
In the Hamiltonian formalism one deﬁnes the conjugate momenta as
Πi (x) =

∂L
.
∂ (∂0 φi (x))

(3.16)

The Hamiltonian density H is then deﬁned as


H(x) =

Πi (x)∂0 φi (x) − L ,

i

and the total Hamiltonian is
H=

(3.17)


d3 x H .

(3.18)

The Lagrangian formalism has the advantage of keeping explicit at each
stage the Lorentz covariance. Instead, in the Hamiltonian formalism
Lorentz invariance is less explicit, since the time variable plays a special
role in deﬁning the conjugate momenta.

3.2

Noether’s theorem

The relation between symmetries and conservation laws is extremely
important in ﬁeld theory and, at the classical level, it is expressed by
Noether’s theorem. We consider a ﬁeld theory with ﬁelds φi and action
S, and we perform an inﬁnitesimal transformation of the coordinates
and of the ﬁelds, parametrized by a set of inﬁnitesimal parameters a ,
with a = 1, . . . , N , of the general form
xµ → x = xµ + a Aµa (x)
µ

φi (x) → φi (x ) = φi (x) + a Fi,a (φ, ∂φ) ,

(3.19)
(3.20)

with Aµa (x) and Fi,a (φ, ∂φ) given. Equations (3.19, 3.20) deﬁne a symmetry transformation if they leave the action S(φ) invariant, for any
φ. Note that we are not assuming that the ﬁelds φi satisfy the classical equations of motion. A symmetry by deﬁnition leaves the action
invariant for every ﬁeld conﬁguration, solution or not of the equations
of motion.
There are two important distinctions to be drawn. The ﬁrst is between
local and global symmetries. If in eqs. (3.19) and (3.20) the parameters

3.2

a are constants, we have a global symmetry. Instead, the above transformation is a local symmetry if it leaves invariant the action even when
 is allowed to be an arbitrary function of x. Of course, a local symmetry
gives rise also to a global symmetry.3
The second important distinction is between internal and space-time
symmetries. Internal symmetries do not change the coordinates, so they
have Aµa (x) = 0, while space-time symmetries involve also a change in
the coordinates. For internal symmetries (and also for Lorentz transformations and for translations) d4 x is invariant and the condition of
invariance of the action is equivalent to the condition of invariance of
L, but in the general case the symmetries are given by invariances of S,
not of L.
Now, suppose that eqs. (3.19) and (3.20) are a global, but not a local,
symmetry of our theory. Consider what happens if, starting from a given
ﬁeld conﬁguration φi , we perform the above transformation, but with
the a slowly varying functions of x, i.e. |a |
1 and l|∂µ a |
|a |,
a
where l is the characteristic scale of variation of φi . Since the  depend
on x, and we are assuming that eqs. (3.19) and (3.20) are not a local
symmetry, this transformation will not leave the action invariant, and δS
will have a non-vanishing term at O(). However, since the a are slowly
varying, we can expand this O() term in powers of the derivatives,


S(φ ) = S(φ) + d4 x [a (x)Ka (φ) − (∂µ a )jaµ (φ) + O(∂∂)] + O(2 ) ,
(3.21)
where we have denoted by Ka the coeﬃcient of a and by −jaµ the
coeﬃcient of ∂µ a . This equation holds for any slowly varying .4 We
can then apply it also to the case where the a are all constants. However
we know that, if the a are constants, the variation of the action must be
zero because in this case  parametrizes a global symmetry. Therefore we
learn that, in eq. (3.21), the function Ka (φ) is actually zero, for any φ.
Observe that Ka (φ) is by deﬁnition a function of φ but is independent of
; all the  dependence is written explicitly in eq. (3.21). Therefore, even
if to show that Ka (φ) = 0 we have looked at the limiting case of constant
, once we have shown that Ka vanishes, it vanishes independently of .
Then, for any slowly varying function (x), we have the expansion

S(φ ) = S(φ) − d4 x [(∂µ a )jaµ (φ) + O(∂∂)] + O(2 ) .
(3.22)
We now take  to be a function which goes to zero suﬃciently fast at
inﬁnity. This allows us to integrate the above equation by parts (without
making any assumptions on φ) and the boundary term vanishes, so we
get

(3.23)
S(φ ) = S(φ) + d4 x a (x)∂µ jaµ (φ) + O(∂∂) + O(2 ) .
We have derived the above result independently of our choice of φ, and
for  slowly varying and vanishing at inﬁnity.

Noether’s theorem 47

3

However, it can happen that the corresponding global symmetry is trivial,
i.e. it is just the identity transformation. For example, we will see in Section 3.5 that the free electromagnetic
ﬁeld is invariant under the gauge transformation Aµ → Aµ − ∂µ θ. For θ constant the corresponding transformation
is just the identity and does not give
rise to conserved charges (as long as we
do not include matter ﬁelds).

4

We generically denote by

the set of

a with a = 1, . . . N . The statement “

slowly varying” means that all
slowly varying.

a

are

48 Classical ﬁeld theory

Suppose now that, for φ, we choose a classical solution of the equations
of motion, φcl . Observe, ﬁrst of all, that in the action the x are integration variables so, after performing the transformation (3.19, 3.20), we
can rename x as x. Then, as long as we are only interested in studying
the variation of the action, the inﬁnitesimal transformation in eqs. (3.19)
and (3.20) is equivalent to a transformation in which the coordinates are
unchanged, xµ → xµ , while
φi (x) → φi (x − a Aµa ) + a Fi,a = φi (x) + a Fi,a − a Aµa ∂µ φi .

(3.24)

Thus we have rewritten the transformations (3.19, 3.20) in a form that
does not change the coordinates, and with φi (x) → φi (x) + δφi (x) with
δφi (x) some variation that goes to zero at inﬁnity. This is the kind of
variation that is used in the derivation of the equations of motion. By
deﬁnition, a classical solution is an extremum of the action and therefore
if we now take φi = φcl
i the linear term in the variation of S in eq. (3.23)
must be identically zero for any  that vanishes at inﬁnity, independently
of whether or not  depends on x, and of whether or not it is a symmetry
transformation (the condition that  has to vanish at inﬁnity follows
from the fact that the classical equations of motion are obtained from
a variation with ﬁxed boundary conditions, i.e. keeping the ﬁelds ﬁxed
at inﬁnity). Therefore we arrive at the important conclusion that, on
a classical solution of the equations of motion, the N currents jaµ are
conserved,
∂µ jaµ (φcl ) = 0 ,

5
The transformations that we consider
depend on the a in a continuous and
diﬀerentiable way, therefore they form
a Lie group. If the linear term jaµ
in eq. (3.22) vanished, integrating the
inﬁnitesimal transformation we would
ﬁnd that the ﬁnite transformation is the
identity; compare with eqs. (2.3) and
(2.5).

(3.25)

which is the content of Noether’s theorem. In other words, there is a
conserved current jaµ (with a = 1, . . . , N ) for each generator of a symmetry transformation. The fact that the symmetry was global but not
local means that S(φ ) − S(φ) in eq. (3.22) must be non-vanishing, and
therefore jaµ themselves are non-vanishing.5 We now deﬁne the charges
Qa ,

Qa ≡ d3 x ja0 (x, t) .
(3.26)
The current conservation (in the sense of eq. (3.25)) implies that Qa is
conserved (in the sense that it is time-independent). In fact


3
0
∂0 Qa = d x ∂0 ja (x, t) = − d3 x ∂i jai (x, t) .
(3.27)
This is the integral of a total divergence, and vanishes since we assume
a suﬃciently fast decrease of the ﬁelds at inﬁnity. More generally, in a
ﬁnite volume the variation of the charge is given by a boundary term
representing the incoming or outgoing ﬂux.
The explicit form of the current can be obtained performing the variation of the action with  slowly varying, collecting the terms proportional
to ∂µ , and comparing with eq. (3.22). This can be done in full generality. Denoting by δ the variations induced by the transformation (3.19,

3.2

3.20), we have


 

∂L
∂L
δ (∂µ φi ) .
δ (d4 x) L + d4 x
δ φi +
δ S = δ d4 x L =
∂φi
∂(∂µ φi )
(3.28)
Computing the Jacobian of the transformation (3.19, 3.20) to linear
order, we ﬁnd d4 x → d4 x(1 + Aµa ∂µ a ) plus a term ∼ ; δ φi does not
produce terms ∼ ∂ while
δ (∂µ φi ) =

∂φi
∂xν ∂
∂φi
∂φi
−
=
(φi + a Fi,a ) − µ .
µ
µ

µ

ν
∂x
∂x
∂x ∂x
∂x

(3.29)

This produces a term proportional to ∂µ  and equal to
−(∂µ a ) (Aνa ∂ν φi − Fi,a ) .

(3.30)

(Observe that, since δ is a variation that also changes the coordinates,
δ (∂µ φi ) = ∂µ (δ φi ).) Putting together all terms ∼ ∂µ a gives
jaµ =

∂L
[Aν (x)∂ν φi − Fi,a (φ, ∂φ)] − Aµa (x)L .
∂(∂µ φi ) a

(3.31)

For internal symmetries Aµa = 0 and the above expression simpliﬁes to
jaµ = −

∂L
Fi,a
∂(∂µ φi )

(internal symmetries) .

(3.32)

Quite often one is interested in linear transformations of the ﬁelds, in
which case Fi,a (φ, ∂φ) = (Ma )i j φj , where (Ma )i j are N constant matrices.
Finally, let us see what happens if the transformation (3.19, 3.20) is
not a global symmetry. In this case eq. (3.21) still holds, since it is the
most general expansion of the variation of the action when  is slowly
varying; however, now Ka (φ) does not vanish, and indeed it represents
the variation of the Lagrangian under the global transformation, K a ≡
(δa L)global , where (δa L)global is deﬁned by (δL)global = a (δa L)global .
Following the same steps that lead to eq. (3.25) we now ﬁnd that, on
the classical solutions,
∂µ jaµ = −(δa L)global ,

(3.33)

where jaµ is still given by eq. (3.31). This expression is particularly
useful when (δa L)global is small compared to the relevant scales, so that
the current is approximately conserved.

3.2.1

The energy–momentum tensor

Space-time translations are a symmetry which is present in all the theories that we will consider. In this case the index a appearing in a is

Noether’s theorem 49

50 Classical ﬁeld theory

a Lorentz index and, as explained in Section 2.7, all ﬁelds are scalars
under translations. Therefore
xµ → x = xµ + µ = xµ + ν δνµ
φi (x) → φi (x ) = φi (x)
µ

(3.34)

and in eqs. (3.19) and (3.20) we have Aµν = δνµ and Fi,a = 0. The four
µ
conserved currents j(ν)
≡ θµ ν therefore form a Lorentz tensor, known as
the energy–momentum tensor. Using eq. (3.31) and raising the ν index,
θµν = η νρ θµ ρ we get
θµν =

∂L
∂ ν φi − η µν L .
∂(∂µ φi )

(3.35)

Equation (3.25) becomes
∂µ θµν = 0

(3.36)

on the solutions of the classical equations of motion. The conserved
charge associated to the energy–momentum tensor is the four-momentum,

(3.37)
P ν ≡ d3 x θ0ν .
This is the deﬁnition of four-momentum in ﬁeld theory. A ﬁeld conﬁguration, solution of the equations of motion, carries an energy E = P 0
and a spatial momentum P i which can be calculated using eqs. (3.35)
and (3.37).
The energy–momentum tensor deﬁned from eq. (3.35) in general is
not automatically symmetric in the two indices µ, ν, so for instance in
eq. (3.36) one should be careful to contract ∂µ with the ﬁrst index of
θµν . However, consider the “improved” energy–momentum tensor
T µν = θµν + ∂ρ Aρµν

(3.38)

where Aρµν is an arbitrary tensor antisymmetric in the indices ρ, µ.
This new tensor is still conserved: ∂µ ∂ρ Aρµν = 0 because of the antisymmetry in ρ, µ. Furthermore, for µ = 0, ∂ρ Aρ0ν = ∂i Ai0ν is a
spatial divergence, and therefore this term does not contribute to the
four-momentum (3.37), if the ﬁelds vanish suﬃciently fast at inﬁnity.
Therefore T µν and θµν are physically equivalent, and one can choose
Aρµν such that T µν is symmetric.
The reader with some knowledge of general relativity may compare
this deﬁnition with the deﬁnition of energy–momentum tensor in general
relativity, which is given by the variation of the action with respect to
the metric. Since the metric is symmetric, this deﬁnition automatically
gives the symmetric form of T µν .

3.3

3.3

Scalar ﬁelds

3.3.1

Real scalar ﬁelds; Klein–Gordon equation

Scalar ﬁelds 51

We now have all the elements for writing down Poincaré invariant actions. We start with the theory of a single, real scalar ﬁeld φ. An
action describing a non-trivial dynamics must contain ∂µ φ. In order to
have a Lorentz invariant action the index µ must be saturated and, for
a scalar ﬁeld, the only possibility is to contract it with another factor
∂ µ φ. Therefore the kinetic term must be proportional to ∂µ φ∂ µ φ. We
ﬁrst consider the action



1
S=
(3.39)
d4 x ∂µ φ∂ µ φ − m2 φ2 .
2
The Euler–Lagrange equation gives
(2 + m2 )φ = 0 ,

(3.40)

with 2 = ∂µ ∂ µ . This is the free Klein–Gordon (KG) equation. A plane
wave e±ipx is a solution of eq. (3.40) if p2 = m2 , i.e. if
(p0 )2 − p 2 = m2 .

(3.41)

Therefore, the classical KG equation imposes the relativistic dispersion
relation, and the parameter m appearing in the action is the mass (we
take by deﬁnition m > 0). Taking into account that φ must be real, the
most general solution is a real superposition of plane waves,



d3 p

φ(x) =
ap e−ipx + a∗p eipx |p0 =Ep ,
(3.42)
3
(2π) 2Ep


where Ep ≡ + p 2 + m2 . The factor 2Ep is a convenient choice
of normalization of the coeﬃcients ap . The solution is evaluated on
p0 = +Ep , i.e. on the positive solution of eq. (3.41). Note however that
in eq. (3.42) we have both solutions that oscillate as e−iEp t (positive
frequency modes) and as e+iEp t (negative frequency modes). The proper
interpretation of the latter modes will only come after quantization of
the theory.6
The overall sign (and normalization) of the action (3.39) is irrelevant
as long as we are interested in the equations of motion, but is important
for obtaining a positive deﬁnite Hamiltonian (and the correct choice
depends on our convention for the metric). The momentum conjugate
to φ is
∂L
= ∂0 φ ,
(3.43)
Πφ =
∂(∂0 φ)
and the Hamiltonian density is
H = Πφ ∂0 φ − L =


1 2
Πφ + (∇φ)2 + m2 φ2 .
2

(3.44)

6

Of course, after one has included both
the solutions eipx and e−ipx with p0 =
+Ep one does not get anything new
including solutions with p0 = −Ep .
For instance, a term e−ipx , when p0 =
−Ep , is equal to exp{−ip0 t + ip·x} =
exp{iEp t + ip·x}. After changing the
dummy integration variable p to −p we
get back to exp{iEp t − ip·x} which is
just eipx with p0 = +Ep .

52 Classical ﬁeld theory

The energy momentum tensor is found from eq. (3.35),
θµν = ∂ µ φ∂ ν φ − η µν L ,

(3.45)

so that

1
(∂0 φ)2 + (∇φ)2 + m2 φ2 .
(3.46)
2

We see that θ00 = H, as expected, and H = d3 x θ00 . The Hamiltonian
is the conserved charge related to the invariance under time translations.
We now compute the conserved currents associated to Lorentz invariance. In this case the parameters a which appear in eqs. (3.19) and
(3.20) are better labeled by an antisymmetric pair of Lorentz indices;
we will denote them by ω ρσ , and δxµ = ω µ ν xν can be rewritten as
 µ
δxµ =
A(ρσ) ω ρσ ,
(3.47)
θ00 = (∂0 φ)2 − L =

ρ<σ

with
Aµ(ρσ) = δρµ xσ − δσµ xρ .

7

We have reabsorbed a minus sign in
the deﬁnition of j (ρσ)µ , compared to
the sign which comes from eq. (3.31).
Of course, if a current j µ is conserved,
also −j µ is conserved.

(3.48)

This gives the term Aµa which appears in eq. (3.31), while for a scalar
ﬁeld φ (x ) = φ(x) and therefore Fi,a = 0. We can then compute the
µ
conserved currents j(ρσ)
, and we ﬁnd that they can be written in terms
of the energy–momentum tensor as7
j (ρσ)µ = xρ θµσ − xσ θµρ .

(3.49)

In particular, the conserved charge associated to spatial rotations is


ij
3
i 0j
j 0i
M = d x (x θ − x θ ) = d3 x ∂0 φ (xi ∂ j − xj ∂ i )φ
(3.50)
and we recognize the operator Lij = i(xi ∂ j − xj ∂ i ) found in eq. (2.78) as
a representation of the Lorentz generator on the scalar ﬁeld. Integrating
by parts the spatial derivatives we can also rewrite eq. (3.50) as


i
d3 x φLij (∂0 φ) − (∂0 φ)Lij φ .
M ij =
(3.51)
2
We now deﬁne the scalar product
φ1 |φ2

i
=
2



↔

d3 x φ1 ∂0 φ2 ,

(3.52)

↔

where f ∂µ g ≡ f ∂µ g − (∂µ f )g. This scalar product is time-independent if
φ1 , φ2 are solutions of the KG equation. In fact, using the KG equation,
∂0 [φ1 ∂0 φ2 − (∂0 φ1 )φ2 ] = φ1 ∂02 φ2 − (∂02 φ1 )φ2 = φ1 ∇2 φ2 − (∇2 φ1 )φ2
(3.53)

3.3

and, inserted into eq. (3.52), this expression gives zero after integration
by parts. Observe that this scalar product is not positive deﬁnite. Equation (3.51) can be written as the expectation value of the operator L ij
with this scalar product,
M ij = φ|Lij |φ .

(3.54)

This is completely general and elucidates the relation between the representation of the generators as operators acting on ﬁelds (here L ij )
and the value of the corresponding charges on a given solution of the
equations of motion (here M ij ) . For instance, for the four-momentum

(3.55)
P µ ≡ d3 x θ0µ
we have the equality
P µ = φ|i∂ µ |φ .

(3.56)

We check it for µ = 0,

i
d3 x [φ(i∂0 )∂0 φ − (∂0 φ)i∂0 φ]
φ|i∂ 0 |φ = φ|i∂0 |φ =
2


1
=
d3 x −φ∂02 φ + (∂0 φ)2
2

1
(3.57)
=
d3 x −φ(∇2 − m2 )φ + (∂0 φ)2 .
2
Integrating by parts, −φ∇2 φ becomes (∇φ)2 and we see that we have
reproduced the integral of θ 00 , eq. (3.46). Note that i∂ µ and i(xµ ∂ ν −
xν ∂ µ ) are hermitian operators with respect to this scalar product.
Finally, the free KG action can be generalized to a self-interacting
scalar ﬁeld introducing a scalar potential V (φ),


1
∂µ φ∂ µ φ − V (φ) .
(3.58)
S = d4 x
2
The quadratic part of the potential gives the mass term while higher
powers, like φ3 , φ4 , etc. give non-linear contributions to the equations
of motion and therefore correspond to self-interactions.

3.3.2

Complex scalar ﬁeld; U(1) charge

We can assemble two real scalar ﬁelds φ1 and φ√
2 , with the same mass
m, into a single complex scalar φ = (φ1 + iφ2 )/ 2. The KG action is
the sum of the actions of φ1 and φ2 and, written in terms of φ, reads



S = d4 x ∂µ φ∗ ∂ µ φ − m2 φ∗ φ .
(3.59)
The complex ﬁeld φ still satisﬁes the KG equation, as we can see from the
fact that by deﬁnition its real and imaginary parts φ1 and φ2 separately
satisfy the KG equation. Alternatively, we can obtain the same result

Scalar ﬁelds 53

54 Classical ﬁeld theory

considering as independent variables φ and φ∗ , rather than φ1 and φ2 ,
and performing the variation of the action (3.59) with respect to φ∗ ,
holding φ ﬁxed. The mode expansion of φ is



d3 p

(3.60)
φ(x) =
ap e−ipx + b∗p eipx |p0 =Ep ,
3
(2π) 2Ep
with ap , bp independent, since the reality condition on φ is now absent.
The interesting new aspect of the complex KG ﬁeld is the existence of a
global U (1) symmetry of the action,
φ(x) → eiθ φ(x) ,

φ∗ (x) → e−iθ φ∗ (x) ,

(3.61)

which of course makes sense only on complex ﬁelds. The Noether current
can be found from eq. (3.32) with φi = (φ, φ∗ ) and Fi,a = (Ma )i j φj with
∗
Mφ φ = i, Mφ∗ φ = −i,
↔

jµ = −i(φ∂µ φ∗ − φ∗ ∂µ φ) = iφ∗ ∂µ φ .

(3.62)

The conserved U (1) charge is


↔
QU(1) = d3 x j 0 = i d3 x φ∗ ∂0 φ .

(3.63)

In Section 3.5.4 we will study the interaction of the complex scalar ﬁeld
with the electromagnetic ﬁeld, and we will see that the U (1) current
is coupled to the gauge ﬁeld, and that the U (1) charge is the electric
charge.
The scalar product for the complex scalar ﬁeld is deﬁned as

↔
(3.64)
φ|φ = i d3 x φ∗ ∂0 φ ,
and it is conserved on the equations of motion. We see that the value of
the conserved charge (3.63) on a classical ﬁeld conﬁguration φ is equal
to the expectation value of the identity operator with respect to this
scalar product,
(3.65)
QU(1) = φ|φ .
This is completely analogous to eqs. (3.54) and (3.56) since the generator of the U (1) transformation is the identity operator, as we can see
observing that eq. (3.61) can be written as φ(x) → eiθT φ(x), with the
generator T equal to the identity.

3.4

Spinor ﬁelds

3.4.1

The Weyl equation; helicity

We now consider the theory of a single left-handed Weyl ﬁeld ψL . We
† µ
σ̄ ψL is a four-vector, where σ̄ µ = (1, −σ i ).
found in Section 2.5 that ψL

3.4

Spinor ﬁelds 55

It is therefore possible to write a Lorentz-invariant kinetic term which
is ﬁrst-order in the derivative,
† µ
σ̄ ∂µ ψL .
LL = iψL

(3.66)


The factor i in front is ﬁxed by the condition that the action d4 x LL
is real, as we verify immediately using the fact that the matrices σ̄ µ are
hermitian. The equation of motion is obtained varying with respect to
†
∗
∗
, considering ψL
and ψL as two independent ﬁelds. Since ∂µ ψL
does
ψL
∗
not appear in LL , the Euler–Lagrange equation is simply ∂L/∂ψL
= 0,
which gives σ̄ µ ∂µ ψL = 0, or, more explicitly
(∂0 − σ i ∂i )ψL = 0 .

(3.67)

As a consequence (using σ i σ j = δ ij + iijk σ k and the fact that, on a
regular function, ∂i ∂j is symmetric in i, j), ∂02 ψL = (σ i ∂i )(σ j ∂j )ψL =
∂i2 ψL , or
2ψL = 0 .
(3.68)
Then eq. (3.67) implies the massless KG equation. However, eq. (3.67)
is a ﬁrst-order diﬀerential equation, and gives further information. Consider for instance a plane wave solution of positive energy,
ψL (x) = uL e−ipx

(3.69)

where uL is a constant spinor, and all the x-dependence is in the plane
wave exp{−ipx} = exp{−iEt + ip · x}. Then eq. (3.67) gives
p·σ
uL = −uL
E

(3.70)

and eq. (3.68) gives E = |p |. Since for a spin 1/2 ﬁeld the angular
momentum is J = σ/2, eq. (3.70) can be rewritten as
1
(p̂ · J) uL = − uL ,
2

(3.71)

where p̂ = p /|p |. This shows that a left-handed massless Weyl spinor
has helicity h = −1/2. This result is consistent with our discussion of
the representations of the Poincaré group in Chapter 2, where we found
that massless particles are helicity eigenstates.8
The energy–momentum tensor is obtained from the general formula
(3.35). Observe that on a classical solution σ̄ µ ∂µ ψL = 0, so the Lagrangian (3.66) vanishes. The energy–momentum tensor is therefore

and in particular

† µ ν
θµν = iψL
σ̄ ∂ ψL ,

(3.72)

†
θ00 = iψL
∂0 ψL .

(3.73)

The Lagrangian (3.66) is invariant under a global U (1) internal transformation,
(3.74)
ψL → eiθ ψL ,

8

Let us anticipate that, when we quantize the theory, this result will translate
into the existence of massless quanta of
the ﬁeld ψL with helicity h = −1/2,
while the negative energy solutions will
correspond to antiparticles with h =
+1/2; see Section 4.2.2.

56 Classical ﬁeld theory
µ
† µ
with Noether’s current jU(1)
= ψL
σ̄ ψL and conserved charge


QU(1) =

†
d3 x ψL
ψL .

(3.75)

Of course, the Weyl Lagrangian (3.66) is not invariant under parity.
Under parity ψL is sent into a right-handed spinor which is not even
present in eq. (3.66).
Observe also that the Lagrangian
i † µ ↔
i  † µ 
† µ
L L = iψL
σ̄ ∂µ ψL − ∂µ ψL
σ̄ ψL = ψL
σ̄ ∂µ ψL
(3.76)
2
2
diﬀers from eq. (3.66) only by a total derivative, and it therefore gives
the same equations of motion and conserved currents, so it is classically
equivalent. We will verify in Exercise 3.5 that the conserved currents
computed with L L are diﬀerent from those computed with LL , but the
conserved charges are the same.
For a right-handed Weyl spinor ψR we saw in Section 2.5.2 and in Ex† µ
ercise 2.3 that ψR
σ ψR is a four-vector, and therefore we can construct
the Lagrangian
† µ
σ ∂µ ψR ,
(3.77)
LR = iψR
with σ µ = (1, σ i ) in place of σ̄ µ = (1, −σ i ). We then ﬁnd that the
equation of motion is σ µ ∂µ ψR = (∂0 + σ i ∂i )ψR = 0 and the positive
energy solution has helicity h = +1/2. The energy–momentum tensor
† µ ν
of the right-handed Weyl ﬁeld is θ µν = iψR
σ ∂ ψR .
The neutrinos come into three species (families) νe , νµ , ντ and are spin
1/2 particles. Until recently, the experimental values of their masses
were compatible with zero. Recent results on neutrino oscillations however provide strong evidence that they have small masses. More precisely, these experiments are sensitive to the diﬀerence in mass squared
between diﬀerent families, rather than to the values of the masses themselves, and presently suggest a mass diﬀerence between diﬀerent families ∆m2 between 10−5 and 10−3 eV2 . In most situations the neutrino
masses can be considered as extremely small and, if we neglect them,
neutrinos are described by massless left-handed Weyl spinors.
One could ask whether it is possible to describe a massive particle with
a single Weyl spinor. This is indeed possible, and the resulting mass term
is known as a Majorana mass. We will discuss it in Section 3.4.4. We
ﬁrst turn our attention to Dirac spinors.

3.4.2

The Dirac equation

We now consider the theory that we can build having at our disposal
both a left-handed Weyl spinor ψL and a right-handed Weyl spinor ψR .
The crucial point is that we can construct two new Lorentz scalars,
†
†
ψR and ψR
ψL . In fact, from the explicit form (2.59, 2.60) we see that
ψL
†
†
† †
ΛL ΛR = 1 = Λ†R ΛL , and therefore ψL
ψR → ψL
ΛL ΛR ψR is invariant,
†
and similarly ψR ψL .

3.4
†
†
In particular, we have the two real combinations ψL
ψR + ψR
ψL and
†
†
i(ψL ψR − ψR ψL ). Under a parity transformation, ψL ↔ ψR and therefore the ﬁrst combination is a scalar and the second is a pseudoscalar.
The Dirac Lagrangian is deﬁned as

† µ
† µ
†
†
LD = iψL
σ̄ ∂µ ψL + iψR
σ ∂µ ψR − m(ψL
ψR + ψR
ψL ) .

(3.78)

Contrary to the Weyl Lagrangian, the Dirac Lagrangian is invariant
under parity transformation, since under parity ψL ↔ ψR and ∂i → −∂i
so that σ̄ µ ∂µ ↔ σ µ ∂µ .
∗
The Euler–Lagrange equations are obtained considering ψL and ψL
∗
independent (since they are complex ﬁelds) and similarly for ψR , ψR .
∗
∗
and ψR
, we get
Then, performing the variations with respect to ψL
σ̄ µ i∂µ ψL = mψR ,

(3.79)

σ µ i∂µ ψR = mψL .

(3.80)

This is the Dirac equation written in terms of Weyl spinors. Note that,
because of the mass term, ψL and ψR are no longer helicity eigenstates. Applying the operator σ µ i∂µ on both sides of eq. (3.79) and
using eq. (3.80) we get −σ µ σ̄ ν ∂µ ∂ν ψL = m2 ψL . Since ∂µ ∂ν is symmetric we can replace σ µ σ̄ ν with (1/2)(σ µ σ̄ ν + σ ν σ̄ µ ) and use the identity
σ µ σ̄ ν + σ ν σ̄ µ = 2η µν

(3.81)

which follows immediately from the deﬁnition of σ µ and σ̄ µ . We then
ﬁnd
(3.82)
(2 + m2 )ψL = 0 ,
and similarly for ψR . Therefore the Dirac equation implies a massive
KG equation for ψL , ψR , and the parameter m introduced in the Dirac
Lagrangian is indeed a mass term.
It is convenient to write everything in terms of the Dirac spinor. We
write the Dirac spinor as in Chapter 2,


ψL
Ψ=
.
(3.83)
ψR
It is clear that we might as well deﬁne the Dirac spinor taking diﬀerent
√
take (ψR + ψL )/ 2 as
combinations of ψL , ψR . For instance we might
√
the upper component of Ψ and (ψR − ψL )/ 2 as the lower component.
The choice (3.83) deﬁnes the so-called chiral representation. We then
deﬁne the 4 × 4 γ matrices in the chiral representation,




0 1
0
σi
γ0 =
,
(3.84)
,
γi =
−σ i 0
1 0
or, more compactly,


γµ =

0
σ̄ µ

σµ
0


.

(3.85)

Spinor ﬁelds 57

58 Classical ﬁeld theory

Using eq. (3.81) we see that the γ matrices satisfy the Cliﬀord algebra,
{γ µ , γ ν } = 2η µν .

(3.86)

In terms of Dirac spinors, the Dirac equation becomes
(i ∂ − m) Ψ = 0 .

(3.87)

Here we have introduced the Feynman slash notation: for a generic fourvector Aµ , we denote γ µ Aµ by A; then  ∂ is the notation for γ µ ∂µ .
In order to write the Lagrangian in a compact form it is convenient
to deﬁne the Dirac adjoint,
Ψ̄ = Ψ† γ 0 .

(3.88)

†
†
In the chiral representation Ψ̄ = (ψR
, ψL
) and the Dirac Lagrangian can
be written as

LD = Ψ̄ (i ∂ − m) Ψ .
We also deﬁne γ 5 = iγ 0 γ 1 γ 2 γ 3 , so in the chiral representation


−1 0
5
γ =
.
0 1
Therefore (1 ± γ 5 )/2 is a projector on the Weyl spinors,




1 + γ5
1 − γ5
ψL
0
Ψ=
Ψ=
.
ψR
0
2
2

(3.89)

(3.90)

(3.91)

If we take the neutrinos to be massless, a single left-handed Weyl spinor
νL suﬃces for their description. Even in this case, however, it can be
convenient to use a Dirac notation, i.e. to describe the neutrino with a
Dirac spinor ν which, in the chiral representation, has the form


νL
,
(3.92)
ν=
0
and therefore satisﬁes

1 − γ5
ν =ν.
(3.93)
2
As we already remarked, the form (3.83) for the Dirac spinor is a possible
choice but, depending on the problem, other choices might be more
convenient. For instance, we can deﬁne a new Dirac spinor Ψ = U Ψ,
with U a constant unitary matrix. Then the Dirac Lagrangian becomes


LD = (Ψ )† U γ 0 (iγ µ ∂µ − m) U † Ψ = Ψ̄ iγ µ  ∂µ − m Ψ
(3.94)


with γ µ = U γ µ U † and Ψ̄ = (Ψ )† γ 0 . So the explicit form of the
γ matrices changes, as well as the relation between Ψ and the Weyl
spinors ψL , ψR . However, the action and therefore the Dirac equation

3.4

maintains the same form in terms of the redeﬁned Dirac ﬁeld and γ matrices. Furthermore, the algebra (3.86) is invariant under γ µ → U γ µ U †
with U unitary. These diﬀerent explicit expressions for the γ matrices
correspond therefore to equivalent representations of the Cliﬀord algebra. Together with the chiral representation which has been our starting
point, another particularly useful
representation
is obtained acting with


1
1
1
the unitary matrix U = √2
, which gives
−1 1
 


1
φ
ψR + ψL
√
≡
,
(3.95)
Ψ=
ψR − ψL
χ
2
and the γ matrices become


1 0
γ0 =
,
0 −1


γi =


5

0 1 2 3

γ = iγ γ γ γ =

0
1

0
σi
i
−σ
0

1
.
0


,

(3.96)
(3.97)

This representation, known as the ordinary, or standard representation,
is useful in the non-relativistic limit (see Section 3.6). The chiral representation is more useful in the ultra-relativistic limit, when the mass can
be neglected and ψL , ψR are helicity eigenstates, and also displays more
clearly the group theoretical structure since ψL,R are the irreducible
representations of the Lorentz group ( 12 , 0) and (0, 12 ), respectively.
The general solution of the massive Dirac equation is a superposition
of plane waves of the form
Ψ(x) = u(p)e−ipx

(3.98)

Ψ(x) = v(p)eipx ,

(3.99)

and of the form
where u(p), v(p) are four-component spinors. The former, in a classical
theory, is a positive energy solution and the latter is a negative energy
solution. The proper interpretation of the negative energy solutions will
come after quantization, and will be discussed in Chapter 4.
The Dirac equation applied to the plane waves (3.98) and (3.99) gives
( p − m) u(p) = 0 ,
( p + m) v(p) = 0 ,

(3.100)
(3.101)

using the Feynman slash notation,  p = γ µ pµ . We use the chiral representation, and we write


uL (p)
u(p) =
.
(3.102)
uR (p)
We consider the case m = 0. Then we can solve the equation in the rest
frame, where pµ = (m, 0, 0, 0) and eq. (3.100) reads (γ 0 − 1)u(p) = 0.
The solution, using the expression (3.84) for γ 0 , is uL = uR . We see that,

Spinor ﬁelds 59

60 Classical ﬁeld theory

while the KG equation imposes only the mass shell condition p2 = m2 ,
the Dirac equation, being ﬁrst-order in the derivatives, has also the eﬀect
of reducing by a factor of two the number of independent degrees of
freedom, since√it relates uL to uR . A convenient choice of normalization
is uL = uR = m ξ with ξ a two-component spinor satisfying ξ † ξ = 1.
The solution for generic p can be found either directly from the Dirac
equation or performing a boost of the rest frame solution, using the
transformation properties of ψL,R discussed in Chapter 2. In any case,
setting p along the +z direction, the result is
⎞
⎛ 


3
3
s
3 1+σ
ξ
E + p3 1−σ
E
−
p
+
2
2
⎟
⎜
⎟
⎜
s
(3.103)
u (p) = ⎜
⎟.

⎠
⎝ 

1+σ3
1−σ3
s
3
3
ξ
E+p 2 + E−p 2
The index s = 1, 2 labels the two independent solutions,
 


1
0
1
2
ξ =
ξ =
.
0
1

(3.104)

In the ultra-relativistic limit we have pµ → (E, 0, 0, E). Then, when
s = 1, eq. (3.103) becomes


√
0
1
u (p) → 2E
.
(3.105)
ξ1
If instead s = 2
u2 (p) →

√
2E



ξ2
0


.

(3.106)

Thus, in the ultra-relativistic limit (or, equivalently, in the massless
limit), u1 has only the right-handed component while u2 has only the
left-handed component. When we quantize the theory, in Section 4.2, we
will see what this means in terms of the helicities of massless particles.
We can study similarly the equation for v(p); the result diﬀers from
u(p) in the sign of the lower component,
⎞
⎛ 


3
3
ηs
E + p3 1−σ
+ E − p3 1+σ
2
2
⎟
⎜
⎟
⎜
(3.107)
v s (p) = ⎜
⎟,

⎠
⎝ 

3
3
1+σ
1−σ
ηs
−
E + p3 2 + E − p3 2
where again we wrote the result in the frame where p = (0, 0, p3 ) and
in the chiral representation; η s is the two-dimensional spinor describing
the two distinct solutions for v s (p),
 


1
0
1
2
η =
.
(3.108)
η =
0
1
We deﬁne ūs (p) = us† γ 0 and v̄ s (p) = v s† γ 0 . From the explicit form of
u(p), v(p) one ﬁnds a number of useful properties. First of all, from our
normalization choice ξ r † ξ s = δ rs , η r † η s = δ rs , it follows that
ūr (p)us (p) = 2m δ rs ,

v̄ r (p)v s (p) = −2m δ rs

(3.109)

3.4

and
ur † (p)us (p) = 2Ep δ rs ,
ūr (p)v s (p) = 0 ,

v r † (p)v s (p) = 2Ep δ rs ,

(3.110)

v̄ r (p)us (p) = 0 .

(3.111)

When computing scattering cross-sections, one is often interested in the
situation in which we sum over all possible ﬁnal spin states and average
over all possible initial spin states. In this case one ﬁnds a sum over the
spins, that is performed with the help of the formulas

us (p)ūs (p) =  p + m ,
(3.112)
s=1,2



v s (p)v̄ s (p) =  p − m ,

(3.113)

s=1,2

which again can be found from the explicit expressions for u, v. Note of
course that, while ūu is a number, uū is a 4 × 4 matrix.
We will also need the Dirac equation for ū, v̄. Taking the hermitian
conjugate of eqs. (3.100) and (3.101) we ﬁnd
ū(p) ( p − m) = 0 ,

(3.114)

v̄(p) ( p + m) = 0 .

(3.115)

Another useful identity is obtained multiplying eq. (3.114) (with spin
state r) by us (p) from the right and using eq. (3.109), which gives
pµ ūr (p)γ µ us (p) = 2m2 δ rs . Since this must be true for generic pµ , we
ﬁnd that
ūr (p)γ µ us (p) = 2pµ δ rs ,
(3.116)
and similarly
v̄ r (p)γ µ v s (p) = 2pµ δ rs .
µ

(3.117)
5

µ 5

Finally, we observe that the 16 matrices 1, γ , γ , γ γ and
σ µν ≡

i µ ν
[γ , γ ]
2

(3.118)

are linearly independent and therefore the most general 4 × 4 matrix
can be expressed in terms of them. The most general fermion bilinear
is therefore a combination of
Ψ̄Ψ, Ψ̄γ µ Ψ, Ψ̄γ 5 Ψ, Ψ̄γ 5 γ µ Ψ, Ψ̄σ µν Ψ .

(3.119)

Their Lorentz and parity transformation properties are most easily understood writing them in the chiral representation, in terms of Weyl
†
†
ψL ) is a true
ψR + ψR
spinors. We have already seen that Ψ̄Ψ = (ψL
†
†
scalar while Ψ̄γ 5 Ψ = ψL ψR − ψR ψL is a pseudoscalar. Consider now
† µ
† µ
σ̄ ψL + ψR
σ ψR .
jVµ ≡ Ψ̄γ µ Ψ = ψL

(3.120)

† µ
† µ
σ̄ ψL and ψR
σ ψR are four vectors, so Ψ̄γ µ Ψ is
We already know that ψL
a four-vector. Under parity, ψL ↔ ψR and, since σ 0 = σ̄ 0 and σ i = −σ̄ i ,
we have jV0 → jV0 , jVi → −jVi , so jVµ is a true four-vector.

Spinor ﬁelds 61

62 Classical ﬁeld theory

Similarly one ﬁnds that
µ
† µ
† µ
≡ Ψ̄γ 5 γ µ Ψ = ψL
σ̄ ψL − ψR
σ ψR
jA

(3.121)

is a pseudovector and Ψ̄σ µν Ψ is a true tensor.
In eq. (2.88) we have written explicitly the Lorentz transformation of
Dirac spinors in the chiral representation. It is straightforward to check
that, in terms of γ matrices, this transformation reads
i
Ψ → exp{− ωµν σ µν }Ψ .
4

(3.122)

We have derived this transformation law working in the chiral representation. However, once a transformation has been written in terms
of γ matrices, it holds in any representation: if Ψ → ΛD Ψ, we have
U Ψ → U (ΛD Ψ) = (U ΛD U −1 )U Ψ. However Ψ = U Ψ is the spinor in
the new representation and, expanding in power series the exponential,
we see that
i
i
µν
U ΛD U −1 = exp{− ωµν U σ µν U −1 } = exp{− ωµν σ  }
4
4

(3.123)

where σ  µν = (i/2)[γ  µ , γ  ν ] and γ  µ are the Dirac matrices in the new
representation.
Equation (3.122) states that J µν = σ µν /2 provides a representation
of complex dimension four of the Lorentz algebra (2.25). This can also
be checked directly, from the deﬁnition of σ µν in terms of the γ matrices
and using {γ µ , γ ν } = 2η µν . This representation is however reducible,
since we know that Ψ ∈ ( 21 , 0) ⊕ (0, 12 ).

3.4.3

Chiral symmetry

Let us consider the Dirac Lagrangian (3.78) with the mass term set to
zero. In this case the action has a global internal symmetry,
ψL → eiθL ψL ,

ψR → eiθR ψR ,

(3.124)

in which ψL and ψR are rotated by two independent angles θL and θR .
The above transformation therefore belongs to the group U (1) × U (1).
The transformation with θL = θR ≡ α can be written in terms of the
Dirac spinor as
(3.125)
Ψ → eiα Ψ ,
while the transformation with θR = −θL ≡ β can be written as
5

Ψ → eiβγ Ψ .

(3.126)

We can also verify that eqs. (3.125) and (3.126) are symmetry transformations directly on the Dirac action in the form (3.89), with m = 0. For
the transformation (3.125) it is evident. For the transformation (3.126),
using {γ 5 , γ µ } = 0 we can show that
γ µ eiβγ = e−iβγ γ µ ,
5

5

(3.127)

3.4

simply expanding the exponential in power series. Then, using the fact
that γ 5 is hermitian,
Ψ̄γ µ ∂µ Ψ = Ψ† γ 0 γ µ ∂µ Ψ → Ψ† e−iβγ γ 0 γ µ ∂µ eiβγ Ψ .
5

5

(3.128)

The factor exp{iβγ 5 } commutes with ∂µ since β is independent of x
and, from eq. (3.127),
5

5

5

γ 0 γ µ eiβγ = γ 0 e−iβγ γ µ = eiβγ γ 0 γ µ ,

(3.129)

so in eq. (3.128) exp{iβγ 5 } cancels with exp{−iβγ 5 } and Ψ̄γ µ ∂µ Ψ is
invariant.
The transformation (3.125) is a global U (1) symmetry, which will be
promoted to a local gauge symmetry in Section 3.5.4. It is also called
the vector U (1) since, using the Noether theorem, its conserved current
is the vector current
(3.130)
jVµ = Ψ̄γ µ Ψ .
The transformation (3.126) is instead called a chiral transformation, or
the axial U (1) (often denoted as UA (1)). Its conserved current is
µ
= Ψ̄γ µ γ 5 Ψ ,
jA

(3.131)

which, as we have seen above, is a pseudovector, and is called the axial
current.
If we now switch on the mass term, we see that eq. (3.124) is a symmetry transformation only if θL = θR , since the mass term couples ψL
and ψR . Therefore the mass term breaks the axial U (1), while the vector U (1) is preserved. Indeed, if we compute the divergence of the axial
current (3.131) using the equations of motion of the massive theory, we
ﬁnd
µ
∂µ jA
= 2imΨ̄γ 5 Ψ .
(3.132)
The same result can be obtained using the general formula (3.33).

3.4.4

Majorana mass

In Section 3.4.1 we discussed how to describe a spin 1/2 massless particle
using a single Weyl ﬁeld, e.g. left-handed, ψL . In Section 3.4.2 we have
shown that we can introduce a mass term using two spinor ﬁelds, one
left-handed and one right-handed, and this has given rise to a Dirac
mass term.
We are now in the position to reexamine a question that we posed
at the end of Section 3.4.1. Is it possible to describe a massive particle
with a single Weyl ﬁeld, e.g. left-handed? The answer is yes, because we
have seen in eq. (2.64) that, given a left-handed Weyl spinor ψL , we can
∗
. We can therefore
construct a right-handed Weyl spinor ψR = iσ 2 ψL
2 ∗
write the Dirac equation (3.79) using iσ ψL as the right-handed Weyl
ﬁeld,
∗
σ̄ µ i∂µ ψL = imσ 2 ψL
,
(3.133)

Spinor ﬁelds 63

64 Classical ﬁeld theory

and eq. (3.80) gives simply the complex conjugate of this equation. The
algebraic manipulations performed for the Dirac equation to show that it
implies a massive Klein–Gordon equation can be repeated here without
any change (since they are valid independently of whether ψL and ψR are
independent or not), and therefore eq. (3.133) implies (2 + m2 )ψL = 0.
We have therefore constructed a mass term using only ψL . Such a mass
term is known as a Majorana mass.
The formal similarity with the Dirac mass term can be seen writing
eq. (3.133) in terms of the four-component Majorana spinor ΨM , which
in the chiral representation is


ψL
ΨM =
.
(3.134)
∗
iσ 2 ψL
Then eq. (3.133) becomes formally the same as the Dirac equation,
(i ∂ − m)ΨM = 0 .

(3.135)

Naively, one would guess that this can be derived from the variation of a
Dirac action, with Ψ replaced by ΨM . However, this is not true, because
for a Majorana spinor
T 2
σ ψL + h.c. ,
Ψ̄M ΨM = −iψL

(3.136)

T
T 2
2
where ψL
denotes the transpose. In components, ψL
σ ψL = ψL,a σab
ψL,b .
In the classical theory, we deﬁned the Weyl ﬁelds as ordinary commuting
numbers (often called c-numbers when one want to stress that they are
numbers, rather than operators), therefore ψL,a ψL,b is symmetric in the
2
is antisymmetric in (a, b),
indices (a, b). Instead the Pauli matrix σab
and therefore Ψ̄M ΨM vanishes identically. If we wish to write a classical
action for the Majorana mass term we can do it, but we must state that,
already at the classical level, ψL is an anticommuting ﬁeld. Otherwise,
we can be satisﬁed with eq. (3.135), without deriving it from a classical
Lagrangian.
Apart from this technical aspect, the Majorana mass has a very important physical diﬀerence compared to the Dirac mass. As we saw
in Section 3.4.3, the Dirac action with a mass term is invariant under a
global U (1) transformations of ψL and of ψR , ψL → eiα ψL , ψR → eiα ψR ,
see eq. (3.125). Rather than on the action, we can see this invariance
directly on the massive Dirac equation in Weyl form, eqs. (3.79) and
(3.80). For Majorana spinors, however, ψL and ψR are not independent
but are related by complex conjugation. Therefore, if ψL transforms as
∗
ψL → eiα ψL , automatically ψR = iσ 2 ψL
transforms as ψR → e−iα ψR .
It is impossible to deﬁne on a Majorana spinor a U (1) transformation
under which ψL → eiα ψL and at the same time ψR → eiα ψR .
In other words, the Majorana equation (3.133) is not invariant under global U (1) symmetries of the type that in Section 3.4.3 we called
vector U (1) (or simply U (1), while axial U (1) symmetries are denoted
by UA (1)). This means that a spin 1/2 particle which carries a U (1)
conserved charge cannot have a Majorana mass. For instance, all spin

3.5

1/2 particles which have an electric charge, like the electron, cannot
have a Majorana mass. Similarly, processes involving a lepton with a
Majorana mass violate lepton number (i.e. the number of leptons minus
the number of antileptons) since this is again a U (1) symmetry.
A possible candidate for a particle which could have a Majorana mass
is the neutrino. As we mentioned already, at present there are indications
that the neutrinos have tiny masses, but it is not known if these masses
are Dirac or Majorana masses.
A Dirac mass for the neutrino would imply that, together with the
left-handed neutrino, there exists also a right-handed neutrino, which
combines with the left-handed one to produce the Dirac mass. However,
these hypothetical right-handed neutrinos are not seen in weak interactions, and therefore, if they exist, they must be sterile, which means that
they do not participate in weak interactions, or at least they participate
much more weakly than the left-handed neutrinos. The other possibility is that neutrinos are described by purely left-handed ﬁelds and have
Majorana masses. In this case the lepton number symmetry is violated.
Experiments on neutrino-less double beta decay aim at detecting these
violations.

3.5

The electromagnetic ﬁeld

3.5.1

Covariant form of the free Maxwell equations

The electromagnetic ﬁeld is described by a four-vector Aµ , the gauge
potential. The ﬁeld strength tensor is deﬁned as
Fµν = ∂µ Aν − ∂ν Aµ ,

(3.137)

and it is related to the electric and magnetic ﬁelds as
F 0i = ∂ 0 Ai − ∂ i A0 = ∂0 Ai + ∇i A0 = −E i ,
F

ij

= −

ijk

k

B .

(3.138)
(3.139)

The Lagrangian of the free electromagnetic ﬁeld is
1
1
L = − Fµν F µν = (E2 − B2 ) .
4
2

(3.140)

The equations of motion derived from this Lagrangian are
∂µ F µν = 0 .

(3.141)

In terms of the electric and magnetic ﬁelds these are the ﬁrst pair of
Maxwell equations in the absence of sources,
∇ ·E = 0,

∇ × B = ∂0 E ,

(3.142)

The electromagnetic ﬁeld 65

66 Classical ﬁeld theory

written in a Lorentz covariant form. Furthermore, deﬁning
F̃ µν =

9

The tensor ∂µ ∂ρ is symmetric only if
it acts on a regular function Aσ , so that
the derivatives can be interchanged.
The important case where this does not
happen is the Dirac monopole.

1 µνρσ

Fρσ ,
2

(3.143)

we see that (if the gauge ﬁeld is a regular function) ∂µ F̃ µν = µνρσ ∂µ ∂ρ Aσ
vanishes identically, since the antisymmetric tensor µνρσ is contracted
with the symmetric tensor ∂µ ∂ρ .9 Therefore we have the identity
∂µ F̃ µν = 0 ,

(3.144)

which is the second pair of Maxwell equations, ∇ · B = 0 and ∇ × E =
−∂0 B. Equations (3.141) and (3.144) are the Maxwell equations written
in an explicitly covariant form.

3.5.2

Gauge invariance; radiation and Lorentz
gauges

A crucial local symmetry of the Maxwell Lagrangian is the symmetry
under gauge transformations
Aµ → Aµ − ∂µ θ

(3.145)

with θ(x) an arbitrary (regular) function. One veriﬁes immediately that
Fµν is gauge invariant. As long as we consider only the free electromagnetic ﬁeld without interaction, the global version of eq. (3.145) (i.e. θ
independent of x) is trivial and therefore there is no associated conserved
current (this is the situation, in the demonstration of the Noether theorem, where j µ in eq. (3.21) vanishes identically). The situation changes
when we switch on the interaction, as we will see in Section 3.5.4.
The existence of the local symmetry (3.145) introduces new problems,
since it means that the variables Aµ give a redundant description of the
electromagnetic ﬁeld. We can use the gauge freedom to constraint Aµ ,
and a convenient choice is the following. First of all, it is easy to ﬁnd a
gauge transformation that sets A0 = 0. It is given simply by
 t

Aµ → Aµ = Aµ − ∂µ
dt A0 (x, t ) .
(3.146)
After that, we still have the freedom of performing a gauge transformation with θ independent of t, because this does not modify the condition
A0 = 0. Therefore we perform a further gauge transformation which
sends Aµ into a new ﬁeld Aµ = Aµ − ∂µ θ, choosing

θ(x) = −

∂A (y, t)
d3 y
.
4π|x − y|
∂y i
i

(3.147)

Despite its appearance, this function θ is actually independent of t. In
fact, in this gauge E i = −∂0 A i since A0 = 0. Then ∂i E i = 0 implies

3.5

∂0 ∂i A = 0 and we can see from eq. (3.147) that ∂0 θ = 0. Furthermore,
using the identity


1
2
(3.148)
∇x
= −δ 3 (x − y)
4π|x − y|
i

we see that

∇ · A = ∇ · A − ∇2 θ = 0 .

(3.149)

We have therefore used the gauge freedom to set
A0 = 0

∇· A = 0.

(3.150)

This gauge is called the radiation gauge. Note that it implies the Lorentz
gauge,
∂µ Aµ = 0 .

(3.151)

The equation of motion (3.141) in this gauge becomes
0 = ∂µ (∂ µ Aν − ∂ ν Aµ ) = ∂µ ∂ µ Aν − ∂ ν (∂µ Aµ ) = 2Aν ,

(3.152)

and we recognize a massless KG equation for each of the components
of Aν . After quantization, this will translate into the fact that the
electromagnetic ﬁeld describes massless particles. We can look for plane
wave solutions,
(3.153)
Aµ (x) = µ (k)e−ikx + c.c.
where µ is called the polarization vector. Equation (3.152) gives k 2 = 0
while our gauge choice implies 0 = 0 and ·k = 0. Choosing for instance
k = (0, 0, k), i.e. considering an electromagnetic wave traveling in the
z-direction, ·k = 0 becomes 3 = 0. Therefore an electromagnetic
wave has two degrees of freedom, represented by a vector  in the plane
transverse to the direction of propagation. The circular polarizations
± = 1 ± i2 are the helicity eigenstates (see Exercise 2.4).
The advantage of the radiation gauge is to expose clearly the physical
degrees of freedom of the electromagnetic ﬁeld. The disadvantage, however, is that Lorentz covariance is no longer explicit, since eq. (3.150)
is not Lorentz covariant. The Lorentz gauge (3.151) is instead Lorentz
covariant, but alone it is insuﬃcient to eliminate all spurious degrees of
freedom. Therefore we must choose between a redundant, but Lorentz
covariant description, and a description which breaks the covariance but
exposes clearly the physical degrees of freedom. This will be a recurrent
theme in the quantization of gauge ﬁelds.

3.5.3

The energy–momentum tensor

The energy–momentum tensor of the electromagnetic ﬁeld can be computed from eq. (3.35),
1
θµν = −F µρ ∂ ν Aρ + η µν F 2 ,
4

(3.154)

The electromagnetic ﬁeld 67

68 Classical ﬁeld theory

with F 2 ≡ F µν Fµν . This form is not explicitly gauge invariant, since
it depends on Aµ and not only on Fµν . However, using the equation
of motion ∂ρ F µρ = 0, we can see that under a gauge transformation it
changes as
θµν → θµν + F µρ ∂ ν ∂ρ θ = θµν + ∂ρ (F µρ ∂ ν θ) ,

(3.155)

and the conserved charges change as


 0ρ ν 


ν
ν
3
ν
P → P + d x ∂ρ F ∂ θ = P + d3 x ∂i F 0i ∂ ν θ .

(3.156)

The additional term is a total spatial derivative which integrates to zero
assuming, as always, that the ﬁeld decreases suﬃciently fast at inﬁnity.
Therefore the charges are gauge invariant. If we want to have directly a
gauge-invariant form for the energy–momentum tensor then, following
the discussion in Section 3.2.1, we can add a term ∂ρ (F µρ Aν ) to θµν ,
which is by itself conserved, and its µ = 0 component is a total spatial
derivative. We then obtain the “improved” energy–momentum tensor
1
T µν = F µρ Fρ ν + η µν F 2 ,
4

(3.157)

which is explicitly gauge invariant. The energy of the electromagnetic
ﬁeld is


1
d3 x (E2 + B2 )
E = d3 x T 00 =
(3.158)
2
and the spatial momentum is


P i = d3 x T 0i = d3 x (E × B)i .
(3.159)
10

The factors 1/2 in front of the energy
and the factor 1 in front of the Poynting
vector depend on our choice of rationalized units for the electric charge, and
in unrationalized units they would become 1/(8π) and 1/(4π), respectively;
see the Notation.

This is known as the Poynting vector.10 The spatial components T ij
form a spatial tensor, whose negative is known as the Maxwell stress
ij
,
tensor TM
1
ij
TM
≡ −T ij = E i E j + B i B j − δ ij (E2 + B2 ) .
2

(3.160)

Observe that, integrating the equation ∂µ T µi = 0 over a volume V
bounded by a surface S, one ﬁnds


(3.161)
d3 x ∂0 T 0i + ∂j T ji = 0 ,
V
11

Recall that with our signature we
ji
ji
have n̂j TM
= −n̂j TM
.

and therefore11
d i
P =+
dt




ji
d x ∂j TM
=−
3

V

S

ji
dS n̂j TM
,

(3.162)

where P i is the momentum contained in the volume V and n̂ is the
outward normal to the surface. Therefore the Maxwell stress tensor
gives the ﬂow of momentum across a surface.

3.5

From this example we also learn that in ﬁeld theory the observable
quantities are the charges, rather than the currents. The currents (as in
this case the energy–momentum tensor) are not uniquely deﬁned. For
instance, we can add a total four-divergence to the Lagrangian density.
We saw in Section 3.1 that this does not modify the classical equations
of motion, so two Lagrangian densities which diﬀer by a total fourdivergence deﬁne the same classical theory. However, the currents that
one obtains through the Noether theorem using eq. (3.31) are diﬀerent
for the two theories, while the charges are the same (see Exercise 3.5 for
an example).
This means also that in general we cannot localize the energy density
with arbitrary precision. What is well deﬁned is not the energy density,
but rather its integral over a volume V such that the ﬁelds go to zero
suﬃciently fast at the boundaries, so that the ambiguities due to total
divergences become irrelevant. For instance, if we have an electromagnetic wave packet centered around a frequency ω, corresponding to a
wavelength λ = 2π/ω, its energy in a volume V is well deﬁned only if V
is a box with sides equal to at least several wavelengths. Correspondingly, energy density is well deﬁned only in a smeared sense, i.e. as an
average over a box of side equal to a few times λ.12

3.5.4

Minimal and non-minimal coupling to matter

In classical electrodynamics, when we add an external current j µ , the
second pair of Maxwell equations (3.144) are not modiﬁed, since they
are just a consequence of the deﬁnition of F µν (assuming again that we
have regular gauge ﬁelds, and excluding therefore the case of a Dirac
monopole), while the ﬁrst pair (3.141) becomes
∂µ F µν = j ν .

(3.163)

Since F µν is antisymmetric and we are assuming that it is a regular function, it automatically satisﬁes ∂ν ∂µ F µν = 0, and therefore eq. (3.163)
is consistent only if the current j ν is conserved, ∂ν j ν = 0. We can understand this requirement as a consequence of gauge invariance. Equation (3.163) is the equation of motion derived from the action



1 2
µ
4
F + j Aµ .
S=− d x
(3.164)
4
The term F 2 is explicitly gauge invariant. The term j µ Aµ , under a
gauge transformation Aµ → Aµ − ∂µ θ, changes by −j µ ∂µ θ. If we integrate by parts and we disregard the boundary term at inﬁnity (which
means that we restrict to gauge transformation or to currents that vanish suﬃciently
fast at inﬁnity), the variation of the action becomes equal

to − d4 x θ ∂µ j µ . The action is therefore gauge invariant if and only if
∂µ j µ = 0.
Beside being respected by classical electrodynamics, we will see that
gauge invariance is also a crucial ingredient for quantizing theories with

12

The electromagnetic ﬁeld 69

This lack of localizability is also
present in the quantum theory, where
it can be understood in terms of the
uncertainty principle. In fact, in order
to know the energy of the electromagnetic ﬁeld in a box of side L, we must
known how many photons there are at
a given time and what is the energy of
each. However, in order to know if a
photon is inside the box, we must know
its position with an error ∆x < L, and
correspondingly we have ∆p > 1/L. If
we take L  λ, the uncertainty on the
momentum becomes much bigger than
the momentum itself.

70 Classical ﬁeld theory

a massless vector ﬁeld Aµ . Gauge invariance is a guiding principle in
building the theory of fundamental interactions, and the corresponding
theories are known as gauge theories.
A very general method for writing a gauge invariant action is the
following. We start from a theory with a global U (1) invariance. Let
us consider for deﬁniteness the Dirac action (3.89), but the procedure is
completely general. We consider the transformation
Ψ → eiqθ Ψ .

(3.165)

This transformation is a symmetry of the free Dirac action if θ is a
constant, but we want to consider a generic function θ(x). The free
Dirac action is not invariant if θ depends on x, because then the factor
eiqθ coming from Ψ does not commute with ∂µ and so it cannot be
canceled by the factor e−iqθ coming from Ψ̄. We have assigned to the
ﬁeld Ψ a parameter q that deﬁnes its transformation properties. We
will see that it has the meaning of the electric charge of the particles
described by the ﬁeld, in units of e.
At the same time, the action of the free electromagnetic ﬁeld is invariant under
(3.166)
Aµ → Aµ − ∂µ θ .
We then deﬁne the covariant derivative of Ψ as
Dµ Ψ = (∂µ + iqAµ )Ψ

(3.167)

and we immediately verify that, under the combined transformations
(3.165) and (3.166), with θ = θ(x),
Dµ Ψ → eiqθ Dµ Ψ ,

(3.168)

i.e. Dµ Ψ transforms in the same way as Ψ, even when θ is a function of x.
It is now easy to construct a Lagrangian with a local U (1) invariance. It
suﬃces to replace all derivatives ∂µ with covariant derivatives Dµ . This
procedure is expressed by saying that we have gauged the global U (1)
symmetry, promoting it to a local symmetry. The resulting theory is
called a gauge theory and Aµ is called a gauge ﬁeld. More precisely, it is
a U (1), or abelian gauge ﬁeld, since we have gauged a U (1) symmetry. In
Chapter 10 we will study how to gauge non-abelian groups, like SU (N ),
and this will lead to non-abelian gauge theories and to the Standard
Model.
It is important to note that the form of the covariant derivative depends on the transformation properties of the ﬁeld on which it acts. For
instance, for ﬁelds transforming as in eq. (3.165), Dµ depends on the
parameter q. One can consider more general transformation laws, however. As an example, a gauge ﬁeld transforms as in eq. (3.166) rather
than being multiplied by a phase, and on a gauge ﬁeld we simply deﬁne
Dµ Aν = ∂µ Aν since Fµν is already gauge invariant. We will ﬁnd more

3.5

general transformation properties, and more general deﬁnitions of the
covariant derivative, when we study non-abelian gauge theories.
It is now straightforward to couple a Dirac ﬁeld of charge q to the
electromagnetic ﬁeld: we just replace ∂µ by Dµ in the Dirac Lagrangian
and we have
LD = Ψ̄ (iγ µ Dµ − m) Ψ
(3.169)
or, more explicitly,
LD = Ψ̄ (iγ µ ∂µ − m) Ψ − qAµ Ψ̄γ µ Ψ .

(3.170)

Thus, the electrodynamics of a spinor ﬁeld is obtained coupling Aµ to
the current Ψ̄γ µ Ψ. The resulting theory has by construction the local
U (1) symmetry deﬁned by eqs. (3.165) and (3.166), with θ an arbitrary
function of x, and therefore it obviously also has the global symmetry
Ψ → eiqθ Ψ, Aµ → Aµ with θ a constant. Applying the Noether theorem
to this global symmetry we see that (modulo of course an arbitrary normalization) the conserved current is the vector current that we already
met in Section 3.4.3,
(3.171)
jVµ = Ψ̄γ µ Ψ .
Therefore the electromagnetic ﬁeld is coupled to a conserved current.
The conserved charge is


(3.172)
Q = d3 x Ψ̄γ 0 Ψ = d3 x Ψ† Ψ
and, as we will see after quantization of the theory, it has the meaning
of the electric charge, in units of e.
The equation of motion is
(iγ µ Dµ − m) Ψ = 0 .

(3.173)

This is the Dirac equation describing a spin 1/2 charged particle interacting with an electromagnetic ﬁeld. We will discuss some of its
consequences in the next section.
Consider now a complex scalar ﬁeld φ transforming under gauge transformations as φ → eiqθ φ. Again Dµ φ is deﬁned as (∂µ + iqAµ )φ and the
complex KG Lagrangian becomes
L = (Dµ φ)∗ Dµ φ − m2 φ∗ φ
(3.174)
= ∂µ φ∂ µ φ∗ + iqAµ (φ∂µ φ∗ − φ∗ ∂µ φ) + q 2 |φ|2 Aµ Aµ − m2 φ∗ φ .
This is the Lagrangian of scalar electrodynamics. As we discussed in
Section 3.3.2, the complex Klein–Gordon theory has a U (1) symmetry,
whose conserved current is given in eq. (3.62). We see from eq. (3.175)
that Aµ couples to this current, and there is also a term in the Lagrangian proportional to Aµ Aµ |φ|2 . The latter term plays an important
role in the Higgs mechanism and in superconductivity, as we will see in

The electromagnetic ﬁeld 71

72 Classical ﬁeld theory

Section 11.3. Note that it is not possible to couple in this way a real
scalar ﬁeld to the electromagnetic ﬁeld. For a real ﬁeld necessarily q = 0
otherwise eiqθ φ becomes complex. After quantization, a real scalar ﬁeld
describes particles which are neutral under electromagnetism.
However, one can have a neutral scalar particle formed by charged constituents, and this particle will interact with the electromagnetic ﬁeld
not through its electric charge, which is zero, but through its higher
electric and magnetic multipoles, exactly as the hydrogen atom is neutral but interacts with the electromagnetic ﬁelds through its electric and
magnetic dipole moments, quadrupole moments, etc. This means that it
must be possible to write a gauge-invariant coupling to the electromagnetic ﬁeld also for a real scalar ﬁeld. For example, a possible interaction
term is
LS = aS φFµν F µν ,

(3.175)

where aS is a coupling constant. Another possibility is
LP S = aP S φ µνρσ F µν F ρσ ,

(3.176)

with another coupling constant aP S . Observe that under parity Fµν F µν
is invariant while µνρσ F µν F ρσ is a pseudoscalar. Therefore the interaction Lagrangian LS preserves parity only if φ is a scalar ﬁeld, while LP S
is invariant only if φ is a pseudoscalar ﬁeld. For example the neutral
pion π 0 is a pseudoscalar, and it decays into two photons; the Lagrangian
LP S gives a good phenomenological description of its interaction with
the electromagnetic ﬁeld.
The coupling to the electromagnetic ﬁeld which is obtained performing
in the free Lagrangian the replacement ∂µ → Dµ is called the minimal
coupling. Otherwise the coupling is called non-minimal.
Similarly, for a Dirac fermion we can in principle write non-minimal
couplings. For example we can add to the Lagrangian an interaction
term
Lint = a Ψ̄σ µν Ψ Fµν ,

(3.177)

with a coupling constant a. After quantization of the theory we will
ﬁnd that the interaction term qAµ Ψ̄γ µ Ψ describes indeed the coupling
of the gauge ﬁeld with the electric charge of the particle. We will instead
show in Solved Problem 7.2 that the coupling (3.177) corresponds to a
magnetic dipole interaction.
We leave as an exercise to verify that the non-minimal coupling constants aS , aP S and a are not dimensionless, but rather have the dimension of the inverse of a mass. We will understand in Section 5.6 why
interaction terms of this sort have a less fundamental signiﬁcance than
interactions terms in which the coupling constant is dimensionless, as in
the minimal coupling.

3.6

3.6

First quantization of relativistic wave equations 73

First quantization of relativistic wave
equations

As we already discussed in the Introduction, a ﬁrst quantization of relativistic wave equations cannot be performed consistently. In particular,
we have seen that both the free Klein–Gordon and the free Dirac equation have solutions proportional to e−ipx and solutions proportional to
e+ipx . The former oscillate in time as e−iEt and therefore in a ﬁrst quantized formalism are eigenfunctions of the Hamiltonian H = i∂/∂t with
eigenvalue E, while the latter have eigenvalue −E and therefore correspond to negative energy solutions. The proper interpretation of these
solutions comes only after the ﬁeld quantization that we will discuss in
the next chapter.13 However, as we will show below and in Solved Problem 3.1, in the non-relativistic limit the Dirac equation in an external
electromagnetic ﬁeld reduces to a Schrödinger equation, i∂ψ/∂t = Hψ,
with a Hamiltonian H which contains an expansion in powers of the velocity of the particle, i.e. relativistic corrections. A posteriori, the ﬁeld
theoretical treatment shows that the ﬁrst-order correction produced by
the relativistic wave equations is correct, i.e. it coincides with the ﬁeld
theory result.14 It is therefore useful to examine the non-relativistic limit
of the Dirac equation, and to treat it in ﬁrst quantization, promoting
the classical ﬁeld to a wave function. One should be aware, however,
that higher-order corrections are not correctly given by the relativistic
wave equations, and the full QFT treatment is needed.
The Dirac equation (3.173) for an electron of charge q = e (with e < 0
in our notation) in an external electromagnetic ﬁeld Aµ is
[γ µ (i∂µ − eAµ ) − m]Ψ = 0 .

(3.178)

To study the non-relativistic limit, it is convenient to use the standard
representation, eqs. (3.95) and (3.96), and to deﬁne
χ (x, t) = eimt χ(x, t) ,

φ (x, t) = eimt φ(x, t)

(3.179)

−iEt

so that, if φ, χ have a time-dependence e
with E the relativistic
energy, then φ and χ oscillate as e−iENR t with ENR = E − m. Then
the Dirac equation reads
(i∂0 − eA0 )φ = −σ·(i∇ + eA)χ ,




(i∂0 − eA0 + 2m)χ = −σ·(i∇ + eA)φ .

(3.180)
(3.181)

Observe that in eq. (3.180) the mass term obtained acting with ∂0 on eimt
cancels with the mass term originally present in the Dirac equation, while
in eq. (3.181) they add up (recall also that ∂i = ∇i , see the Notation).
In the non-relativistic limit we have
i∂0 χ

mχ ,

eA0

m

(3.182)

and to lowest order the equation for χ is easily solved,
χ  −

1
σ·(i∇ + eA)φ .
2m

(3.183)

13
For fermions, Dirac found an ingenious solution to the negative energy
problem using the Pauli principle and
assuming that all states with negative
energies are ﬁlled. However, this solution does not work for bosons, and today in high energy physics this “ﬁlled
Dirac sea” has only historical interest.
In condensed matter, however, it leads
to an interpretation in terms of electrons and holes which is still useful, see
Exercise 4.6.

14
In the language of Feynman graphs
that we will discuss in Chapter 5, the
relativistic wave equations reproduce
the result of tree level graphs.

74 Classical ﬁeld theory

This solution is the lowest order in a relativistic expansion, and further
corrections will be computed in Solved Problem 3.1. We now insert this
expression for χ into eq. (3.180) and use

σ i σ j (i∇i + eAi )(i∇j + eAj )φ = (i∇ + eA)2 + iijk σ k ie(∇i Aj ) φ
(3.184)
which follows from σ i σ j = δ ij +iijk σ k . Finally, ijk ∇i Aj = (∇ × A)k =
B k is the magnetic ﬁeld, and therefore (writing p = −i∇) eq. (3.180)
becomes
i∂0 φ 



(p − eA)2
e
−
σ·B + eA0 φ .
2m
2m

(3.185)

Therefore in the non-relativistic limit the Dirac equation reduces to a
Schrödinger equation for the two-component spinor φ , with a minimal
coupling to the gauge ﬁeld Aµ , plus an interaction term with a magnetic
ﬁeld. We see that the contribution to the energy due to the term σ·B
can be written as −µ·B with a magnetic moment µ given by
µ=

e
e
σ=
S
2m
m

(3.186)

where S = σ/2 is the spin of the electron. In non-relativistic mechanics, a charged particle with charge e and angular momentum L has a
magnetic moment
e
µ=
L.
(3.187)
2m
It is then customary to write the magnetic moment due to the spin as
µ=

ge
S,
2m

(3.188)

where g is called the gyromagnetic ratio, and we see that the Dirac
equation predicts g = 2 while non-relativistic physics erroneously suggests g = 1. The present experimental value is (see the Introduction)
(g − 2)/2 = 0.001 159 652 187(4) and the deviations from g = 2 come
from loop corrections that we will discuss in Chapter 7 and, in detail, in
Solved Problem 7.2.

3.7

Solved problems

Problem 3.1. The ﬁne structure of the hydrogen atom
In this problem we use the Dirac equation to compute the ﬁne structure of
the hydrogen atom. In this case the external potential Aµ is just the Coulomb
potential of the nucleus of charge −Ze (with Z = 1 for hydrogen, but it takes
no eﬀort to keep Z generic; recall also that e < 0), therefore A = 0 and

3.7
A0 = −Ze/(4πr). The Coulomb potential is V (r) = eA0 = −Zα/r. The
Dirac equation in the standard representation becomes
(i∂0 − V − m)φ = −iσ·∇χ ,

(3.189)

(i∂0 − V + m)χ = −iσ·∇φ .

(3.190)

We look for a solution φ(x, t) = e−iEt φ(x), χ(x, t) = e−iEt χ(x) and we deﬁne
ε = E − m. Then
(ε − V )φ = −iσ·∇χ ,

(3.191)

(2m + ε − V )χ = −iσ·∇φ .

(3.192)

We now want to perform an expansion in powers of p2 /m2 of the Dirac equation, keeping corrections O(p2 /m2 ) to the kinetic term p2 /(2m) and to the
potential V , i.e. we want to keep terms up to O(p4 /m3 ) and O(V p2 /m2 ).
Equation (3.192) allows us to eliminate χ using
„
«−1
„
«
1
1
ε−V
ε−V
−i
σ·∇φ =
σ·pφ 
1+
1−
σ·pφ .
χ=
2m + ε − V
2m
2m
2m
2m
(3.193)
We can then obtain an equation of the Schrödinger type for the two-component
spinor φ. In order to make contact with a Schrödinger equation, however,
we must also ensure that the wave function that appears in the Schrödinger
equation is properly normalized. To this purpose, we observe that the total
charge, in units of e, is given by eq. (3.172),
Z
Z
ˆ
˜
(3.194)
Q = d3 x Ψ† Ψ = d3 x |φ|2 + |χ|2 .
Observe that, in ﬁrst quantization, Q is positive deﬁnite. This will not be
true in second quantization, where Q will be the number of electrons minus
the number of positrons, as we will see in eq. (4.43). In the ﬁrst quantized
formalism, we require that the wave function expresses the condition that
there is one electron in a volume V (with V → ∞). We therefore deﬁne a
Schrödinger wave function φS (again a two-components spinor) requiring that
Z
Z
ˆ
˜
d3 x |φS |2 =
d3 x |φ|2 + |χ|2 .
(3.195)
V

V

p
φ), at zeroth order φS = φ. However, we want to substitute
Since χ = O( m
eq. (3.193) into eq. (3.191) keeping the ﬁrst-order correction, so for consistency
we must use χ  (1/2m)(−iσ·∇)φ in eq. (3.195). Then to this order
»
–
Z
Z
1
∗
d3 x |φS |2 =
d3 x |φ|2 +
(σ·∇φ
)(σ·∇φ)
4m2
V
»
–
ZV
1 ∗
d3 x |φ|2 −
φ
(σ·∇)(σ·∇)φ
=
4m2
»
–
ZV
1 ∗ 2
d3 x |φ|2 −
φ
∇
φ
=
4m2
„
«
ZV
p2
φ.
(3.196)
d3 x φ ∗ 1 +
=
4m2
V

„

Therefore
φS =

1+

p2
p4
+
O(
)
8m2
m4

«
φ

(3.197)

Solved problems 75

76 Classical ﬁeld theory
and

«
„
p4
p2
+ O( 4 ) φS .
φ= 1−
8m2
m

(3.198)

In terms of φS , keeping only the ﬁrst-order corrections, eq. (3.193) reads
«
„
«
„
1
ε−V
p2
φS
1−
σ·p 1 −
2m
2m
8m2
«
»
„
–
ε−V
p2
1
−
σ·p 1 −
σ·p φS .

2m
8m2
2m

χ

(3.199)

We now substitute eqs. (3.199) and (3.198) into eq. (3.191). Performing some
simple algebra (and paying attention to the fact that p = −i∇ does not
commute with the potential V (r)!) we get
»

–
p2
p4
V p2
1
p2
+
+
−
(σ·p)V
(σ·p)
φS = 0 .
−V +ε
2m
8m2
16m3
8m2
4m2
(3.200)
p2
+ V )φS . Therefore the term
At lowest order, we have of course εφS  ( 2m
p2
ε 8m
2 in the above equation can be rewritten as
ε−

ε

p2
p2
p2
=
ε

8m2
8m2
8m2

„

p2
+V
2m

«
.

(3.201)

Of course ε is a c-number and we can write it both to the left or to the right
of p2 . When we substitute it with p2 /(2m) + V the diﬀerence between writing
it to the left or to the right is O(p6 /m4 ) and therefore can be neglected, at
the order at which we are working. Equation (3.200) then becomes
»
εφS =

p4
p2
1
+V −
+
2m
8m3
4m2

„
(σ·p)V (σ·p) −

1 2
(p V + V p2 )
2

«–
φS .

(3.202)
The correction term involving the potential can be rewritten in a more transparent form using the identity σ i σ j = δ ij + i ijk σ k , together with
[pi , V ] = −i(∇i V ) = ieE i

(3.203)

(where E is the electric ﬁeld) and
pi V pi = (V pi + [pi , V ])pi = V p2 + ieE·p .

(3.204)

Then
1 2
1
(p V + V p2 ) = pi V pi + i ijk σ k pi V pj − (p2 V + V p2 )
2
2
1
1
= V p2 + ieE·p − p2 V − V p2 + i ijk σ k ([pi , V ] + V pi )pj
2
2
1
2
2
= ieE·p + (V p − p V ) − e ijk E i pj σ k .
(3.205)
2

σ i σ j pi V pj −

(In the last line we used the fact that ijk V pi pj = 0 because pi pj is a symmetric
tensor; note that this could not be used directly on ijk pi V pj because pi and
V do not commute). Using eq. (3.203) it is easy to see that
V p2 − p2 V = −ie(E·p + p ·E)

(3.206)

3.7
(again, one has to be careful since E and p do not commute!). Inserting this
into eq. (3.205) we ﬁnd
σ i σ j pi V pj −

1 2
ie
(p V + V p2 ) = ieE·p − (E·p + p ·E) − e ijk E i pj σ k
2
2
ie
= (E·p − p ·E) − e ijk E i pj σ k
2
e
(3.207)
= − (∇·E) − e(E × p)·σ .
2

Plugging this into eq. (3.202) we get
» 2
–
p4
p
e
e
+V −
−
σ·(E
×
p)
−
(∇·E)
φS .
εφS =
2m
8m3
4m2
8m2

(3.208)

All the manipulations that we have performed until now hold for a generic
potential V (x). We now use the fact that in the hydrogen atom V = V (r)
and therefore
«
„
1 dV
,
(3.209)
eE = −∇V = −r
r dr
so that
−

1 1 dV
1 1 dV
e
S·(r × p) =
S·L
σ·(E × p) =
4m2
2m2 r dr
2m2 r dr

(3.210)

where S = σ/2 is the spin of the electron and L is the orbital angular momentum. Therefore, in a radial potential V (r), the ﬁrst relativistic correction
to the Schrödinger equation is given by
»
εφS =

–
p2
1 1 dV
p4
e
+
(∇·E)
φS .
+V −
S·L
−
2m
8m3
2m2 r dr
8m2
(3.211)

The correction term −p4 /(8m3 ) is easily understood, since it comes from the
expansion of the relativistic expression ε = (p2 + m2 )1/2 . The term ∼ S · L
is the spin–orbit coupling and the term ∼ ∇·E is known as the Darwin term.
Restricting now to the Coulomb potential
Zα
r

(3.212)

1 dV
Zα
= 3 .
r dr
r

(3.213)

V (r) = −
we have
Using

1
= −4πδ (3) (x)
r
(see, e.g. Jackson (1975), Section 1.7 for the proof) we ﬁnd
∇2

−e∇·E = +∇2 V = −Zα∇2

1
= 4πZα δ (3) (x) .
r

(3.214)

(3.215)

We can therefore write
εφS = (H0 + Hpert )φs

(3.216)

2

where H0 = p /(2m) + V is the unperturbed Hamiltonian of the hydrogen
atom and
Hpert = −

p4
Zα
πZα (3)
+
S·L +
δ (x) .
8m3
2m2 r 3
2m2

(3.217)

Solved problems 77

78 Classical ﬁeld theory
Denoting by |njl the unperturbed states of the hydrogen atom, to ﬁrst order
in perturbation theory the correction to the energy levels is given by
(∆E)njl = njl|Hpert |njl .

(3.218)

We must therefore compute the following expectation values:
(1) njl|p4 |njl: if ψnjl is a solution of the unperturbed Schrödinger equation, then by deﬁnition (p2 /(2m) + V )ψnjl = n ψnjl , or
«
„
p2
Zα
ψnjl = n +
ψnjl
(3.219)
2m
r
where

mZ 2 α2
2n2
are the unperturbed energy levels. Therefore
„
«2
Z
Zα
∗
p4 ψnjl = 4m2 njl|
|njl .
d3 x ψnjl
n +
r
n = −

(3.220)

(3.221)

For a Coulomb potential V = −Zα/r one has
njl|

1
(mαZ)2
|njl = 3
2
r
n (l + 12 )

(3.222)

„
«
3
1
.
njl| p4 |njl = 4(mZα)4 − 4 + 3
4n
n (l + 21 )

(3.223)

mαZ
1
|njl =
,
r
n2

and therefore

njl|

(2) njl|S · L/r 3 |njl: from J = L + S it follows that
j(j + 1) = l(l + 1) + s(s + 1) + 2S · L

(3.224)

with s = 1/2, and using the wave function of the hydrogen atoms one has
njl|

(mαZ)3
1
,
|njl = 3
3
r
n l(l + 12 )(l + 1)

if l = 0

(3.225)

and njl|1/r 3 |njl = 0 if l = 0. Therefore
1
3
(mαZ)3
njl| 3 S · L|njl = (1−δl,0 ) 3
[j(j +1)−l(l+1)− ] . (3.226)
r
4
2n l(l + 12 )(l + 1)
(3) njl|δ 3 (x)|njl: this is easily computed:
Z
(mαZ)3
njl|δ 3 (x)|njl = d3 x|ψnjl (x)|2 δ 3 (x) = |ψnjl (0)|2 =
δl,0 . (3.227)
πn3
Putting all contributions together and considering the two cases j = l ± 1/2
when l = 0, and j = 1/2 when l = 0, we ﬁnd that the result can always be
expressed only in terms of n, j, and there is no separate dependence on l. The
ﬁnal result is
»
–
m(Zα)4
3
1
.
(∆E)njl = −
−
(3.228)
2n3
4n
j + 12

3.7
Therefore the ﬁne structure removes the degeneracy between states with the
same principal quantum number n but diﬀerent values of j. However, states
with the same n, j and diﬀerent l, as the states 2S1/2 and 2P1/2 , are still
degenerate at the level of the Dirac equation, i.e. at the level of the ﬁrst
relativistic correction. In principle one might look for higher-order corrections
coming from the Dirac equation, using perturbation theory with respect to
Hpert at higher orders (indeed, it is even possible to ﬁnd a closed form for the
energy levels predicted by the Dirac equation to all orders in α), but physically
this is not meaningful since, starting from the next order, the corrections due to
the quantum nature of the electromagnetic ﬁeld come into play, and the correct
framework for computing these corrections is quantum electrodynamics, rather
than the Dirac equation where Aµ is treated as an external, given, classical
ﬁeld.
The structure of the energy levels of the hydrogen atom, including the ﬁne
structure correction (3.228) is shown in Fig. 3.1. For instance, the separation
between the states 2P3/2 and 2P1/2 of the hydrogen is, from eq. (3.228)
E2P3/2 − E2P1/2 = −

mα4 5
mα4
mα4 1
+
=
 4.53 × 10−5 eV ,
16 8
16 8
32

2S 1/2
Lamb
shift
2P1/2

separation from the
..
Schrodinger equation

1S 1/2

Triplet

Hyperfine
structure

Singlet

The corresponding wavelength is λ = c/f  21.105 cm, in the radio waves.
This line is of great importance in astrophysics for investigating the presence of
neutral hydrogen in our and in other galaxies because radio waves, compared to
most other wavelengths, are much less aﬀected by absorption in the interstellar
medium, and propagate to a very large distance.
Problem 3.2. Relativistic energy levels in a magnetic ﬁeld
We consider now an electron in a magnetic ﬁeld B = Bz (we take B > 0).
For the gauge ﬁeld we can take A0 = Ax = Az = 0 and Ay = Bx. It is
even technically simpler to solve the Dirac equation in this external magnetic
ﬁeld exactly, rather than performing a non-relativistic expansion. However,
one should recall that only the ﬁrst-order non-relativistic correction is really
correct, and at higher orders eﬀects from quantum ﬁeld theory come into play.
We write the Dirac equation in the standard representation as
(i∂0 − m)φ = σ·(p − eA)χ

(3.232)

(i∂0 + m)χ = σ·(p − eA)φ

(3.233)

where, as usual, p = −i∇. We look for a solution of the form
χ(x) = χ(x )e−iEt .

Fine
structure

(3.230)

know as the Lamb shift. The explanation for this splitting was, historically,
one of the ﬁrst successes of QED. At a comparable level, we ﬁnd the hyperﬁne
structure, due to the interaction between the spin of the nucleus and the spin
of the electron. Each level then splits into a triplet and a singlet and, for
instance,
(3.231)
E1S1/2 ,triplet − E1S1/2 ,singlet  1420.4 MHz .

φ(x) = φ(x )e−iEt ,

2P3/2

(3.229)

corresponding to a frequency f = ω/(2π)  10.9 GHz, in the domain of
microwaves. Actually, the levels 2S1/2 and 2P1/2 are not exactly degenerate,
as predicted by eq. (3.228), but rather have a splitting
E2S1/2 − E2P1/2  1057 MHz

Solved problems 79

(3.234)

Fig. 3.1 The lowest lying energy levels of the hydrogen atom. Note that
the ﬁgure is not to scale. In reality, the
ﬁne structure splittings are smaller by
a factor ∼ 10−5 compared to the separation between the levels 2S1/2 and
1S1/2 , and the Lamb shift and the hyperﬁne structure are smaller by a factor
∼ 10 compared to the ﬁne structure.

80 Classical ﬁeld theory
Then eqs. (3.232) and (3.233) become

15

Observe that with our choice of A
we have [pi , Aj ] = 0 and therefore in
(p − eA)2 we do not have to be careful
about ordering. Otherwise the mixed
term in (p − eA)2 is −e(p ·A + A·p ).

(E − m)φ(x ) = σ·(p − eA)χ(x )

(3.235)

(E + m)χ(x ) = σ·(p − eA)φ(x )

(3.236)

Substituting χ(x ) from eq. (3.236) into eq. (3.235) and performing basically
the same manipulations as in Section 3.6, we ﬁnd15
ˆ
˜
(E 2 − m2 )φ(x ) = (p − eA)2 − eσ·B φ(x )
ˆ 2
˜
= p + e2 B 2 x2 − 2epy Bx − eσz B φ(x ) . (3.237)
Since py , pz commute with x, we can search for a solution of the form
φ(x ) = ei(py y+pz z) f (x) ,

(3.238)

where py and pz are c-numbers and f (x), as φ(x ), is a two-component spinor.
The equation for f (x) becomes
–
»
d2
2
− 2 + (py − eBx) − eBσz f (x) = (E 2 − m2 − p2z )f (x) .
(3.239)
dx
We take f (x) to be an eigenfunction of σz with eigenvalue σ = ±1, σz f = σf .
Then
»
–
d2
1
py 2
− 2 + (2e2 B 2 )(x −
) f (x) = (E 2 − m2 − p2z + eBσ)f (x) . (3.240)
dx
2
eB
This is formally identical to the Schrödinger equation of a harmonic oscillator
with frequency 2|e|B. The energy levels therefore are given by
1
)2|e|B ,
2

(3.241)

ˆ
˜1/2
E(n, pz , σ) = m2 + p2z + (2n + 1 + σ)|e|B
.

(3.242)

E 2 − m2 − p2z + eBσ = (n +
or (using e = −|e|)

We observe that there is a continuous degeneracy in px and py , as well as a
discrete degeneracy E(n, pz , σ = +1) = E(n + 1, pz , σ = −1). In the nonrelativistic limit p2z  m2 , (2n + 1)|e|B  m2 , the expansion of eq. (3.242)
gives
„
«
1+σ
p2
(3.243)
E(n, pz , σ)  m + z + n +
ωB
2m
2
with ωB = |e|B/m, and we recover the Landau levels of non-relativistic quantum mechanics.

Summary of chapter
• The classical dynamics of a ﬁeld theory is given by the Euler–
Lagrange equation (3.13).
• Noether’s theorem states that for any continuous global symmetry
there is a current j µ which is conserved, i.e. ∂µ j µ = 0. Given
the symmetry transformation in the form (3.19, 3.20), the current
can be computed using eq. (3.31). Given a conserved current, the
charge given in eq. (3.26) is time-independent.

Exercises 81

• Invariance under space-time translations leads, via Noether’s theorem, to the conservation of the energy–momentum tensor, given
in eq. (3.35). The corresponding conserved charges are energy and
momentum, see eq. (3.37).
• The kinetic term of the actions for the scalar or spinor ﬁelds are
derived from the requirement of Poincaré invariance. This leads
to the free Klein–Gordon equation for scalar particles (eq. (3.40))
and to the free Weyl or Dirac equations for spin 1/2 particles,
eqs. (3.67) and (3.87). For the vector ﬁelds, there is also an issue
of gauge invariance; the equations of motion give a pair of Maxwell
equations, while the second pair is a consequence of the deﬁnition
of F µν , see eqs. (3.141) and (3.144).
• There is large freedom in the choice of interaction terms. For
instance, we can add a generic potential V (φ) to the action of
a scalar ﬁeld, eq. (3.58). For the electromagnetic ﬁeld, we have
seen minimal and non-minimal couplings in Section 3.5.4. When
we study the quantum theory, we will see that some choices of
interaction terms can be of more fundamental signiﬁcance than
others.
• Relativistic wave equations reduce, in the non-relativistic limit, to
a Schrödinger equation plus corrections. We can then treat them
in ﬁrst quantization. We have seen that in this way two remarkable
predictions are obtained from the Dirac equation: the gyromagnetic factor of the electron is predicted to be g = 2, in contrast
with g = 1 from classical physics, and the ﬁne structure of the
hydrogen atom can be correctly computed. However, higher-order
relativistic corrections can only be computed in the framework of
second quantization.

Exercises
(3.1) Actions have the same dimensions as , so they are
dimensionless in our  = 1 units. Find the dimensions of scalar, spinor, and gauge ﬁelds in d = 4
dimensions.
R Repeat the analysis in d dimensions,
with S = dd x L and L the same as in the d = 4
case.

zero,
S=

1
2

Z
d4 x η µν ∂µ φ∂ν φ ,

(3.244)

and a dilatation transformation with parameter α,
xµ → x  = eα xµ
µ

(3.2) We saw on page 59 that the solution of the massive
Dirac equation in the rest frame is uL = uR ≡
√
m ξ. Perform a boost on this solution along
the z axis and verify that the result is given by
eq. (3.103).
(3.3) Consider the KG action with the mass term set to

φ(x) → φ (x ) = φ(x) exp{−dφ α} . (3.245)
(i) Show that this transformation is a global symmetry, for an appropriate choice of the parameter
dφ . Find the Noether current associated to this
symmetry and verify that it is conserved on the
equations of motions.

82 Classical Field Theory
(ii) Show that, if in the KG action we have also
a non-vanishing mass term, then the above transformation is not a symmetry. Show that instead
a term V (φ) = λφ4 does not spoil the dilatation
symmetry. What are the dimensions of λ ?
(3.4) (i) Consider the Lagrangian of QED with the electron mass m set to zero, and consider the dilatation
xµ → eα xµ , Aµ → e−dA α Aµ , ψ → e−dψ α ψ. Find
the values of dA , dψ for which this transformation
is a symmetry.
(ii) Compute the conserved current and express it
in terms of the energy–momentum tensor of the
theory. Verify that the conservation of the dilatation current follows from the fact that the trace of
the energy–momentum tensor vanishes in the massless theory.
(iii) Include the electron mass term in the Lagrangian. Compute the dilatation current using
eq. (3.31) with the new Lagrangian. Verify that
it is not conserved and relate its divergence to the
trace of the energy–momentum tensor.

(3.5) Consider the two Dirac Lagrangians
L = ψ̄(i ∂ − m)ψ ,

L = ψ̄(

i ↔
∂ −m)ψ . (3.246)
2

Verify that they are classically equivalent. Compute the energy–momentum tensor in the two cases.
Verify that they are diﬀerent, but they give rise to
the same conserved charges.
(3.6) Consider a ﬁve-dimensional space-time labeled by
(t, x, y) where (t, x) are the usual coordinates of
four-dimensional space-time and y is a compact coordinate which parametrizes the extra dimension,
with −R/2  y  R/2. Consider the free KG
equation in this space, (25 + m2 )φ = 0, where
25 ≡ 2 − ∂ 2 /∂y 2 and 2 = ∂02 − ∇2 is the usual
four-dimensional d’Alambertian. Show that, from
the point of view of a four-dimensional observer,
this equation describes an inﬁnite set of massive
particles, and compute their masses. These particles are known as Kaluza–Klein modes. What do
you think is the experimental bound on the size R
of the extra dimension?

Quantization of free ﬁelds
4.1
4.1.1

Scalar ﬁelds

4.1 Scalar ﬁelds

Real scalar ﬁelds. Fock space

From the basic principles of quantum mechanics we know that, to quantize a classical system with coordinates q i and momenta pi , in the
Schrödinger picture, we promote q i , pi to operators and we impose the
commutation relation [q i , pj ] = iδ ij . In the Heisenberg picture, where
the operators depend on time, the commutation relation is imposed at
equal time. The same principle can be applied to a scalar ﬁeld theory,
where the coordinates q i (t) are replaced by the ﬁelds φ(t, x) while pi (t)
are replaced by the conjugate momenta Π(t, x), and we interpret x as
a label that distinguishes the “coordinates” φ(t, x) of our system. Since
x is a continuous variable, δij must be replaced by a Dirac delta. Thus,
the basic principle of canonical quantization is to promote the ﬁeld φ
and its conjugate momentum to operators, and to impose the equal time
commutation relation
[φ(t, x), Π(t, y)] = iδ (3) (x − y) ,

(4.1)

while, at equal time, we impose [φ(t, x), φ(t, y)] = [Π(t, x), Π(t, y)] = 0.
Furthermore, a real ﬁeld is promoted to a hermitian operator. Let us
ﬁrst apply this procedure to a free real scalar ﬁeld. The mode expansion
of a free real scalar ﬁeld is given in eq. (3.42). Promoting the real ﬁeld
φ to a hermitian operator means to promote ap to an operator while a∗p
becomes the hermitian conjugate operator a†p ; thus

φ(x) =



d3 p

ap e−ipx + a†p eipx ,
3
(2π) 2Ep

(4.2)

with p0 = Ep . The conjugate momentum is given by eq. (3.43). Using these expressions it is easy to verify that, in terms of ap , a†p , the
commutation relation (4.1) reads
[ap , a†q ] = (2π)3 δ (3) (p − q) ,

(4.3)

[a†p , a†q ] = 0 .

(4.4)

while
[ap , aq ] = 0,

4
83

4.2 Spin 1/2 ﬁelds

88

4.3 Electromagnetic ﬁeld

96

84 Quantization of free ﬁelds

It is sometimes convenient to put the system into a box of size L, so that
the total volume V = L3 is ﬁnite. This procedure regularizes divergences
coming from the inﬁnite-volume limit or, equivalently, from the small
momentum region, and is an example of an infrared cutoﬀ. In a ﬁnite
box of size L, imposing periodic boundary conditions on the ﬁelds, the
momenta take the discrete values pi = (2π/L)ni with ni = 0, ±1, ±2, . . .,
and therefore
 3 

2π
3
.
(4.5)
d p→
L
n

The condition d3 p δ (3) (p − q) = 1 then gives
 3
L
δ (3) (p − q) →
δp,q .
(4.6)
2π
In particular, this implies that
(2π)3 δ (3) (p = 0) → V .

(4.7)

Recalling the standard commutation relation of the creation and annihilation operators of a harmonic oscillator, [a, a† ] = 1, we see from eq. (4.3)
that the commutation relations of the real scalar ﬁeld are equivalent to
that of a collection of harmonic oscillators, with one oscillator for
√ each
value of the momentum p (apart from a normalization factor 1/ V in
ap and a†p ).
We can now construct the Fock space following the standard procedure
for the harmonic oscillator: we interpret ap as destruction operators and
a†p as creation operators, and we deﬁne a vacuum state |0 as the state
annihilated by all destruction operators, so for all p
ap |0 = 0 .

(4.8)

We normalize the vacuum with 0|0 = 1. The generic state of the Fock
space is obtained acting on the vacuum with the creation operators,
|p1 , . . . pn ≡ (2Ep1 )1/2 . . . (2Epn )1/2 a†p1 . . . a†pn |0 .

(4.9)

The factors (2Ep )1/2 are a convenient choice of normalization. In particular, the one-particle states are
|p = (2Ep )1/2 a†p |0 .

(4.10)

From the commutation relations and eq. (4.8) we ﬁnd that
p1 |p2 = (2Ep1 )1/2 (2Ep2 )1/2 0|ap1 a†p2 |0
= (2Ep1 )1/2 (2Ep2 )1/2 0|[ap1 , a†p2 ]|0
= 2Ep1 (2π)3 δ (3) (p1 − p2 ) .

(4.11)

The factors (2Ep )1/2 in eq. (4.10) have been chosen so that in the above
scalar product the combination Ep δ (3) (p − q) appears, which is Lorentz
invariant (see Exercise 4.2).

4.1

Scalar ﬁelds 85

We now compute the energy of these states. The Hamiltonian can be
written in terms of ap , a†p substituting eq. (4.2) and the corresponding
expression for Π into the Hamiltonian density (3.44), and integrating
over d3 x; one ﬁnds





1 †
d3 p
1
d3 p
†
†
†
a ap + a p ap =
Ep
Ep ap ap + [ap , ap ] .
H=
(2π)3
2 p
(2π)3
2
(4.12)
The second term is the sum of the zero-point energy of all oscillators,
and it is proportional to (2π)3 δ (3) (0). In a ﬁnite volume we see from
eq. (4.7) that (2π)3 δ (3) (0) → V . The zero-point energy is therefore

1
d3 p
Ep ,
(4.13)
Evac = V
2
(2π)3
and the energy density of the vacuum is

1
1
d3 p
ρvac ≡ Evac =
Ep .
(4.14)
V
2
(2π)3

For large |p|, Ep = p2 + m2  |p| and the integral diverges. We can
regulate the divergence putting a cutoﬀ Λ in the integration over large
momenta, so that we integrate only over |p| < Λ. This is an example of
an ultraviolet cutoﬀ. The vacuum energy density then diverges as
 Λ
ρvac ∼

p3 dp ∼ Λ4 .

(4.15)

This is our ﬁrst encounter with an ultraviolet divergence. In quantum
ﬁeld theory we will get used to divergences and we will see under what
conditions these can be cured. In this case, however, the divergence
apparently is relatively harmless. Since what we measure are energy
diﬀerences, we can simply discard this zero-point energy1 and declare
that our Hamiltonian is

d3 p
Ep a†p ap .
(4.16)
H=
(2π)3
We can formalize this statement introducing the concept of normal ordering : given an operator O its normal ordered form, denoted by : O :,
is obtained writing by hand all creation operators to the left of all destruction operators. Thus, for instance, : ap a†p : = a†p ap and we can say
that the quantum Hamiltonian (4.16) is obtained from the classical expression (3.44) promoting φ to an operator and performing the normal
ordering,

1
d3 x : Π2 + (∇φ)2 + m2 φ2 : .
(4.17)
H=
2
We can now compute the energy of the various states of the Fock space.
The vacuum state |0 now, by deﬁnition, has zero energy. The operator
a†p ap is just the number operator of the oscillator labeled by p and

1

This is not true when we include gravity, since any form of energy contributes
to the gravitational interaction. In Section 5.7, after having studied the renormalization of ﬁeld theory, we will come
back to this zero-point energy and we
will discuss its relation with the cosmological constant problem.

86 Quantization of free ﬁelds

therefore the energy of the generic state (4.9) is given by the sum of the
energies Epi of the various particles,
H|p1 , . . . pn = (Ep1 + . . . + Epn ) |p1 , . . . pn .

(4.18)

Similarly we can compute the spatial momentum of these states. From
the Noether theorem, we know how to write the spatial momentum as
the conserved charge associated to spatial translations. For the real
scalar ﬁeld we found it in Section 3.3.1. Performing the normal ordering
we have the quantum expression


i
3
0i
P = d x : θ : = d3 x : ∂0 φ∂ i φ : .
(4.19)

2

Actually, for the momentum operator
it is not really necessary to perform the
normal ordering, since the terms that
come out from the commutators are
odd under p → −p and cancel when
we integrate over d3 p.

Substituting φ from eq. (4.2) we see that the terms quadratic in the
destruction operators vanish because they are given by an integral over
d3 p of the function pi a−p ap , which is odd under p → −p . Similarly
for the terms quadratic in the creation operators, and we are left with2

d3 p i †
Pi =
p ap ap .
(4.20)
(2π)3
†
Therefore the
 states ap |0 are one-particle states with momentum p, en2
2
ergy Ep = p + m and mass m. The generic state of the Fock space
(4.9) is a multiparticle state, and its energy and momentum are the sum
of the individual energies and momenta. From the fact that the creation operators commute between themselves we see that the multiparticle states (4.9) are symmetric under the exchange of any two particles,
and therefore obey Bose–Einstein statistics. This is an example of the
spin-statistics theorem, which states that particles with integer spin are
bosons and particles with half-integer spin are fermions.
Finally, we can examine the angular momentum of these states. From
the Noether theorem we found that for scalar ﬁelds the angular momentum operator has a part interpreted as orbital angular momentum,
eq. (3.50), and that there is no intrinsic spin part. Therefore the quanta
of the scalar ﬁeld are spin-0 particles.

4.1.2

Complex scalar ﬁeld; antiparticles

We now consider a free complex scalar ﬁeld. Eq. (3.60) becomes



d3 p

ap e−ipx + b†p eipx
(4.21)
φ(x) =
3
(2π) 2Ep
and the complex conjugate ﬁeld φ∗ becomes the hermitian conjugate
operator,

 † ipx

d3 p

φ† (x) =
ap e + bp e−ipx .
(4.22)
3
(2π) 2Ep
Imposing the canonical commutation relation (4.1) gives
[ap , a†q ] = [bp , b†q ] = (2π)3 δ (3) (p − q) ,

(4.23)

4.1

Scalar ﬁelds 87

while all other commutators [a, a], [a† , a† ], [b, b], [b† , b† ] and all commutators between the a, a† and b, b† are equal to zero. The Fock space is
constructed deﬁning the vacuum state as the state annihilated by all ap
and bp , for each p ,
ap |0 = bp |0 = 0 .
(4.24)
Acting with a†p , b†p we generate the Fock space. After normal ordering,
the Hamiltonian and spatial momentum are given by

d3 p
H=
Ep (a†p ap + b†p bp ) ,
(4.25)
(2π)3

d3 p i †
(4.26)
Pi =
p (ap ap + b†p bp ) .
(2π)3
We see that the quanta of a complex scalar are given by two diﬀerent
particle species with the same mass, created by the a†p and b†p operators
respectively.
The U (1) charge is given in eq. (3.63). We compute it explicitly as a
prototype of many similar calculations in this section,
Z

Z

d3 q
d3 p
p
p
(2π)3 2Eq (2π)3 2Ep
” “
”
h“
× a†q eiqx + bq e−iqx ∂0 ap e−ipx + b†p eipx
”i
”“
“
− ∂0 (a†q eiqx + bq e−iqx ) ap e−ipx + b†p eipx
Z
d3 q
d3 p
p
p
= d3 x
3
(2π) 2Eq (2π)3 2Ep
”
”
“
h“
× a†q eiqx + bq e−iqx Ep ap e−ipx − b†p eipx
“
”“
”i
+Eq a†q eiqx − bq e−iqx ap e−ipx + b†p eipx .

QU (1) = i

↔

d3 x φ † ∂ 0 φ = i

d3 x

(4.27)

The integration over d3 x produces (2π)3 δ (3) (p − q) on the terms ∼ a†q ap and
bq b†p , and (2π)3 δ (3) (p + q) on the terms ∼ bq ap and a†q b†p ; in both cases
|p | = |q | and therefore Eq = Ep . Using this fact it is straightforward to ﬁnd
that the terms ∼ bq ap and a†q b†p cancel and we are left with the terms a†q ap
and bp b†p . In these terms the exponentials are of the type exp{±i(q − p)x} =
exp{±i[(Eq − Ep )t − (q − p )·x]}, and since Eq = Ep the time dependence
cancels, as it should for a conserved charge. Therefore
Z
d3 q
d3 p
p
p
(2π)3 δ (3) (p − q)2Ep (a†q ap − bq b†p )
QU (1) =
(2π)3 2Ep (2π)3 2Eq
Z
d3 p
(4.28)
(a† ap − bp b†p ) .
=
(2π)3 p

Again we normal order this expression,3 and we obtain

d3 p
QU(1) =
(a† ap − b†p bp ) .
(2π)3 p

(4.29)

Since a† a is the number operator of a harmonic oscillator, we see that
the U (1) charge is equal to the number of quanta created by the operators a†p minus the number of quanta created by b†p , integrated over

3
Even if one accepts the normal ordering of the Hamiltonian on the grounds
that a vacuum energy is unobservable,
one cannot accept the normal ordering of the charge on the same grounds,
since a charged vacuum would have observable eﬀects. Rather, in this case
one can understand the need for normal ordering observing that the classical expression for the charge involves
the product of φ∗ with ∂0 φ, eq. (3.63).
When promoted to quantum operators,
φ† and ∂0 φ do not commute, and therefore there is an ordering ambiguity already in the starting expression (4.27);
for instance, we could write φ† ∂0 φ, or
(∂0 φ)φ† , or we could take the symmetric combination. The ambiguity is removed requiring that the charge of the
vacuum vanishes.

88 Quantization of free ﬁelds

4
Of course the overall sign (and normalization) of the Noether charge are
arbitrary, since if a current j µ is conserved also −j µ is conserved, and it is
also an arbitrary convention what state
we call a particle and what an antiparticle.

all momenta. Therefore the states a†p |0 and b†p |0 represent particles
with momentum p, mass m, spin zero and opposite charge; a†p |0 has
QU(1) = +1 while b†p |0 has QU(1) = −1 and is called the antiparticle
of a†p |0 .4 We now understand what is the proper interpretation of the
negative energy solutions of the KG equation. The coeﬃcient of the positive energy solution e−ipx after quantization becomes the destruction
operator of a particle and the coeﬃcient of eipx becomes the creation
operator of its antiparticle. In the case of the real scalar ﬁeld the reality condition requires ap = bp and therefore the particle is its own
antiparticle, and it is neutral under any U (1) symmetry.

4.2

Spin 1/2 ﬁelds

4.2.1

Dirac ﬁeld

We start from the Lagrangian (3.89), L = Ψ̄(iγ µ ∂µ − m)Ψ. The conjugate momentum is
ΠΨ =

δL
= iΨ̄γ 0 = iΨ† .
δ(∂0 Ψ)

(4.30)

A basic principle of quantum ﬁeld theory is the spin-statistic theorem,
that requires that ﬁelds with half-integer spin are quantized imposing
equal time anticommutation relation, while spin with integer spin with
equal time commutation relation. We will not discuss this theorem in
full generality, but will see below how the need for anticommutators
arises in the case of Dirac ﬁelds. So we impose
{Ψa (x, t), Ψ†b (y, t)} = δ (3) (x − y)δab ,

(4.31)

where { , } is the anticommutator and a, b = 1, . . . 4 are the Dirac indices.
The expansion of the free Dirac ﬁeld in plane waves is written

 

d3 p

ap,s us (p)e−ipx + b†p,s v s (p)eipx , (4.32)
Ψ(x) =
3
(2π) 2Ep s=1,2
and therefore

 

d3 p
s
−ipx
†
s
ipx

Ψ̄(x) =
b
. (4.33)
v̄
(p)e
+
a
ū
(p)e
p,s
p,s
(2π)3 2Ep s=1,2
The wave functions us (p), v s (p) are given in eqs. (3.103) and (3.107).
Writing the anticommutation relations (4.31) in terms of the a, b operators we ﬁnd
r
s†
3 (3)
{arp , as†
(p − q)δ rs ,
q } = {bp , bq } = (2π) δ

(4.34)

4.2

with all other anticommutators equal to zero. The Fock space is constructed deﬁning ﬁrst a vacuum state annihilated by all destruction operators
(4.35)
ap,s |0 = bp,s |0 = 0 .
Then multiparticle states are obtained acting on the vacuum with a†p,s
or b†p,s . Since these operators anticommute between themselves, the resulting multiparticle state is antisymmetric under the exchange of two
particles, so spin 1/2 particles (as in general all half-integer spin particles) obey Fermi–Dirac statistics. The one-particle states are normalized
as in the case of the scalar ﬁeld,
(2Ep )1/2 a†p,s |0 ,

(2Ep )1/2 b†p,s |0

(4.36)

and depend on the momentum as well as on the spin degree of freedom
s, which takes the values s = 1, 2.
The Hamiltonian density is obtained computing ﬁrst the classical expression,


H = ΠΨ ∂0 Ψ − L = iΨ† ∂0 Ψ − Ψ̄ iγ 0 ∂0 + iγ i ∂i − m Ψ


(4.37)
= Ψ̄ −iγ i ∂i + m Ψ ,
and therefore we get the Dirac Hamiltonian




3
i
H = d x Ψ̄ −iγ ∂i + m Ψ = d3 x Ψ̄ (−iγ·∇ + m) Ψ .

(4.38)

We then substitute the mode expansion (4.32) and we perform the normal ordering, which in this case means that we put all a†p,s to the left of
all ap,s and all b†p,s to the left of all bp,s , adding a minus sign each time
we exchange the position of any destruction or creation operator, but
without paying the price of the Dirac delta; e.g. : ap,s a†p,s : = −a†p,s ap,s .
The ﬁnal result is



d3 p 
(4.39)
H=
Ep a†p,s ap,s + b†p,s bp,s .
3
(2π) s=1,2
If we were to quantize the Dirac ﬁeld in terms of commutators, at this
point we would have found a minus sign in front of the term b†p,s bp,s , and
therefore the energy would have been unbounded from below. In this
way, instead, we see that the situation becomes completely analogous
to the complex scalar ﬁeld, and the coeﬃcients of the negative energy
solutions eipx become the creation operators of another type of particle.
Let us now study the momentum, spin and charge of these particles.
The momentum operator is again obtained from the Noether theorem,


d3 p   †
(4.40)
p ap,s ap,s + b†p,s bp,s .
P=
3
(2π) s=1,2
The new aspect compared to the complex scalar ﬁeld is the spin degree
of freedom. The angular momentum is the Noether charge associated

Spin 1/2 ﬁelds 89

90 Quantization of free ﬁelds

to spatial rotations and, as discussed in Section 2.6.2, it is made up of
the orbital contribution plus a spin term. Using the expressions for the
Noether current given in Section 2.6.2, the spin part is

1
d3 x Ψ† Σ Ψ ,
(4.41)
S=
2



σi 0
Σ =
.
(4.42)
0 σi
Substituting again the mode expansion one ﬁnds that, in the rest frame
(i.e. when p = 0), the state created by a†p,s with s = 1 has Jz = +1/2
and that with s = 2 has Jz = −1/2. For the state created by b†p,s
the situation is reversed and s = 1 has Jz = −1/2 while s = 2 has
Jz = +1/2. Performing a boost in the z direction, Jz is unchanged
and therefore a state created by a†p,s with p = (0, 0, pz ) and s = 1 has
helicity h = +1/2, etc.
Finally, we saw in Section 3.4.3 that the Dirac action has a U (1) global
symmetry Ψ → eiα Ψ. The conserved charge is


d3 p   †
a ap,s − b†p,s bp,s ,
(4.43)
QU(1) =
(2π)3 s=1,2 p,s
where

i

Table 4.1 The quantum numbers of the one-particles states
created by a†p,s , b†p,s . The momentum p is directed by deﬁnition along the z direction. The
electric charge is in units of e,
with e < 0.
state

Jz

U (1) charge

a†p,1 |0

+ 12

+1

a†p,2 |0
b†p,1 |0
b†p,2 |0

− 12

+1

− 12
+ 12

−1
−1

The one-particle states and their quantum numbers are summarized in
Table 4.1. The states created by a†p,s are called particles and the states
created by b†p,s are called antiparticles. In particular, in electrodynamics,
we identify a†p,s |0 with the electron and b†p,s |0 with the positron. The
U (1) charge is equal to the number of particles minus the number of
antiparticles.

4.2.2

Massless Weyl ﬁeld

In this section we consider a massless Weyl ﬁeld. Its quantization follows
immediately from the quantization of the Dirac ﬁeld. It is convenient
to use a Dirac notation for the Weyl ﬁelds so, if ψL is a left-handed
two-component Weyl ﬁeld and ψR a right-handed Weyl ﬁeld, we write,
in the chiral representation




0
ψL
ΨL =
,
ΨR =
.
(4.44)
ψR
0
We consider ﬁrst ΨL . As with any Dirac ﬁeld, we can expand it as in
eq. (4.32),

 

d3 p
s

ap,s usL (p)e−ipx + b†p,s vL
ΨL (x) =
(p)eipx .
3
(2π) 2Ep s=1,2
(4.45)
s
(p) are Dirac spinors which, in the
However, by deﬁnition usL (p) and vL
chiral representation, have the two lowest components vanishing,
 s 
 s 
UL
VL
s
usL =
=
,
vL
.
(4.46)
0
0

4.2

Comparing with eqs. (3.105), (3.106) and (3.107) we see that when s = 1
s
= 0, so only the term with s = 2 contributes in
we have usL = vL
eq. (4.45).
Therefore



d3 p
†
2
−ipx
2
ipx

, (4.47)
a
u
(p)e
+
b
v
(p)e
ΨL (x) =
p,2
L
L
p,2
(2π)3 2Ep
and



Ψ̄L (x) =



d3 p
2

(p)e−ipx ,
a†p,2 ū2L (p)eipx + bp,2 v̄L
3
(2π) 2Ep

(4.48)

We see from Table 4.1 that b†p,2 creates an antiparticle with h = +1/2
while a†p,2 creates a particle with h = −1/2. Therefore:
In the massless case, the operators ΨL , Ψ̄L create or destroy a particle
with h = −1/2 and its antiparticle with h = +1/2.
If we neglect the small masses indicated by the oscillations experiments, the neutrinos in the Standard Model are described by massless
left-handed Weyl ﬁelds. The neutrino has h = −1/2 and the antineutrino has h = +1/2.
Repeating the analysis for ΨR we see that now only the s = 1 term
survives and therefore the situation is reversed. A right-handed massless
Weyl ﬁeld describes a particle with h = +1/2 and its antiparticle with
h = −1/2.

4.2.3

C, P, T

In Section 2.6.3 we studied how parity and charge conjugation act on
a classical Dirac ﬁeld. We now want to understand how they act on
one-particle states or, equivalently, on the operator Ψ that represents a
quantized Dirac ﬁeld. Let us start with the parity operator P . Under
parity the momentum p → −p while the spin s is unchanged since the
angular momentum is a pseudovector. Then for a particle of type a we
must have
(4.49)
P |p, s; a = ηa | − p, s; a .
We have inserted an index a to label the type of particle and we have
included the possibility of a constant phase factor ηa , since vectors in
the Fock space which diﬀer by a phase still represent the same physical
state. We will call ηa the intrinsic parity of the particle a. Performing
twice the parity transformation on a physical observable gives the identity operation; this is not yet suﬃcient to conclude that ηa2 = 1, since
the observables are built from an even number of fermionic operators.
Therefore, the condition that P 2 is the identity on the physical observable only implies that either ηa2 = +1 or ηa2 = −1. However, it can be
shown (see Weinberg (1995), page 125) that for all spin 1/2 particles except Majorana fermions it is possible to redeﬁne the parity operation so
that ηa2 = +1, and therefore ηa = ±1. In the following we will restrict to

Parity

Spin 1/2 ﬁelds 91

92 Quantization of free ﬁelds

this case. We will come back to Majorana fermions on page 94, and we
will see that the intrinsic parity of Majorana fermions satisﬁes instead
ηa2 = −1, i.e. ηa = ±i.
In order to implement (4.49) on a generic multiparticle state, the operators a†p,s , b†p,s must satisfy P a†p,s = ηa a†−p,s P and P b†p,s = ηb b†−p,s P ,
so that, for instance,
P a†p,s b†q,s |0 = ηa a†−p,s P b†q,s |0 = ηa ηb a†−p,s b†−q,s |0
5

We are assuming that the vacuum
is non-degenerate and invariant under
parity, and therefore P |0 = η|0. In
this case, as part of the deﬁnition of
the operator P , we can choose η = +1,
so P |0 = |0. The situation in which
the vacuum state is degenerate and the
parity operation sends a vacuum state
into a diﬀerent vacuum state is an example of spontaneous symmetry breaking, and will be treated in Chapter 11.

(4.50)

and similarly on a generic multiparticle state.5 Using P 2 = 1, this means
that
P a†p,s P = ηa a†−p,s ,

P b†p,s P = ηb b†−p,s .

(4.51)

As mentioned in Section 2.7.2, the Wigner theorem states that we can
implement this symmetry transformation by means of a unitary operator
P . Then the conditions P P † = P † P = 1, together with P P = 1, give
P † = P . Taking the hermitian conjugate of (4.51) and taking into
account that we are restricting to ηa,b real, we ﬁnd
P ap,s P = ηa a−p,s ,
Therefore
with

P bp,s P = ηb b−p,s .

Ψ(x) → Ψ (x ) = P Ψ(x)P ,

(4.52)
(4.53)




 
d3 p
†
s
−ipx
s
ipx

η
.
a
u
(p)e
+
η
b
v
(p)e
a
−p,s
b
−p,s
(2π)3 2Ep s=1,2
(4.54)
We now change the integration variable p to p = −p. This trans
formation does not change p0 , which is quadratic in p, so p0 = p0 .
0
0

 
Then exp(ipx) = exp(ip t − ipx) = exp(ip t + ip x) = exp(ip x ) with
x = (t, −x), and similarly exp(−ipx) = exp(−ip x ). To understand
how us (p) and v s (p) transform if we change their argument from p to p
we can, without loss of generality, choose p along the z axis and use the
explicit form given in eqs. (3.103) and (3.107). We see that the transformation p3 → −p3 exchanges the upper and lower components in the
chiral representation, and therefore can be written in terms of γ 0 ,

P Ψ(x)P =

us (p) = γ 0 us (p ) ,

v s (p) = −γ 0 v s (p ) .

(4.55)

Therefore, renaming the integration variable p = p,


 
d3 p
s
−ipx
†
s
ipx

η
.
P Ψ(x)P = γ 0
a
u
(p)e
−
η
b
v
(p)e
a
p,s
b
p,s
(2π)3 2Ep s=1,2
(4.56)
We now require that the quantum operator Ψ is a representation of
parity, up to a phase. From the above equation, we see that this is
possible if and only if
ηa = −ηb .

(4.57)

4.2

This shows that the intrinsic parity of a spin 1/2 particle and of its
antiparticle are opposite.6
The transformation law of the operator Ψ then becomes
Ψ(x) → Ψ (x ) = ηa γ 0 Ψ(x ) ,

(4.58)

which, once we recall the form of γ 0 in the chiral representation, is in
agreement with the classical result (2.90), plus the novel quantum eﬀect
of the intrinsic parity factor ηa .7 Of course ηa cancels in any fermion bilinear involving only particles of one type. However, the relative phase
factors of diﬀerent particles can be observables,8 and in particular the
opposite sign of the parity of the particle and its antiparticle is observable. An interesting application is to the case of positronium, which is
the bound state of an electron and positron, and is discussed in Exercise 4.1.
The situation should be compared with what happens to a complex
scalar ﬁeld. In this case repeating the same arguments we have again
P ap P = ηa a−p and P bp P = ηb b−p . We can go through the same steps,
with the only diﬀerence that in φ(x) the annihilation and creation operators are multiplied simply by e−ipx and eipx , respectively, while in Ψ(x)
they were multiplied by u(p)e−ipx and v(p)e−ipx , respectively. Therefore
for scalar ﬁelds we do not get the relative minus sign between ηa and ηb ,
which for Dirac ﬁelds originated in the diﬀerent transformation properties of u(p) and v(p), see eq. (4.55). Then we ﬁnd that the quantized
complex scalar ﬁeld φ gives a representation of parity if ηa = +ηb , so
that the intrinsic parity of a spin-0 particle and of its antiparticle are
equal.
The eﬀect of charge conjugation on the classical Dirac ﬁeld has been
obtained in eq. (2.91), working in the chiral representation. In terms of
γ matrices, eq. (2.91) reads Ψ → −iγ 2 Ψ∗ . We now study how the charge
conjugation C acts on one-particle states. Let us consider the following
transformation of the operators a†p,s , b†p,s
Cap,s C = ηC bp,s ,

Cbp,s C = ηC ap,s .

(4.60)

and therefore (since −iγ 2 is real and (γ 2 )2 = −1) we also have
v s (p) = −iγ 2 (us (p))∗ .
We can now write

CΨ(x)C = ηC

6

If we consider also Majorana fermions
the phase η is no longer restricted to
be real (see page 92), and repeating the
above steps one ﬁnds ηa = −ηb∗ .

7

We have derived the transformation of
Ψ working in the chiral representation.
As already remarked below eq. (3.122),
once the transformation has been written in terms of γ matrices, it holds
in any representation; in this case, if
Ψ → γ 0 Ψ, we have U Ψ → U γ 0 Ψ =
(U γ 0 U −1 )U Ψ. However, Ψ = U Ψ is
the spinor in the new representation
and (U γ 0 U −1 ) is γ 0 in the new representation.
8

More precisely, redeﬁning a new parity
operator P  = P exp{iαB +iβL+iγQ},
where B, L, Q are the baryon number,
lepton number and electric charge, respectively, we can always set the intrinsic parity of the neutron, proton and
electron to the value +1. The intrinsic parities of other particles are then
ﬁxed, see Weinberg (1995), page 125.

Charge conjugation

(4.59)

We limit for simplicity to ηC = ±1. As we saw in eq. (2.91), charge
conjugation relates Ψ and Ψ∗ . Therefore we need to know how u(p), v(p)
transform under complex conjugation. The result is9
us (p) = −iγ 2 (v s (p))∗

Spin 1/2 ﬁelds 93

(4.61)

 

d3 p
s
−ipx
†
s
ipx

b
u
(p)e
+
a
v
(p)e
p,s
p,s
(2π)3 2Ep s=1,2

9

One can check this result on the explicit expressions (3.103, 3.107) with
p = (0, 0, p3 ). However in this frame
only σ3 appears, which is real, so
u(p), v(p) are real. To check that us (p)
is indeed equal to −iγ 2 (vs (p))∗ rather
than to −iγ 2 vs (p) it suﬃces to consider
also the case where p = (0, p2 , 0).

94 Quantization of free ﬁelds


= −iηC γ 2

 

d3 p

bp,s (v s (p))∗ e−ipx + a†p,s (us (p))∗ eipx
3
(2π) 2Ep s=1,2

= −iηC γ 2 Ψ∗ .

(4.62)

We see that this transformation is just the charge conjugation operation
deﬁned on the classical ﬁeld, apart from the quantum phase ηC = ±1
which depends on the particle type.
From eq. (4.59) we see that charge conjugation exchanges the particle
with the antiparticle. The momentum p is unchanged by C and also the
index s. Recall however from the previous section that the state created
by a†p,s describes a particle with Jz = +1/2 when s = 1 and Jz = −1/2
when s = 2, while the state created by b†p,s describes a particle with
Jz = −1/2 when s = 1 and Jz = +1/2 when s = 2 (see Table 4.1); Jz
was deﬁned as the spin in the rest frame, but if a particle has spin Jz in its
rest frame, it also has the same value of Jz if we make a boost along the
z direction, since the generators Jz and Kz commute. Then we see that
charge conjugation transforms a fermion with momentum p = (0, 0, p3 )
and Jz = +1/2 (hence helicity h = 1/2) into an antifermion with the
same momentum but Jz = −1/2 , which means h = −1/2. Therefore
charge conjugation reverses the helicity.
Using the deﬁnition (4.62), one can verify (see Exercise 4.3) that the
current changes sign under charge conjugation,


(4.63)
C Ψ̄γ µ Ψ C = −Ψ̄γ µ Ψ .

10
As already remarked in Section 2.6.4,
a reality condition on a Dirac spinor
cannot be imposed in the form Ψ =
Ψ∗ . In terms of Weyl spinors such a
∗ and
condition would imply ψL = ψL
∗
ψR = ψR ; however, these conditions
are not Lorentz invariant, as we see
from eqs. (2.59) and (2.60).

Time-reversal

For Majorana spinors we found in eqs. (2.91) and (2.94) that ΨcM =
ΨM , i.e. −iγ 2 Ψ∗M = ΨM . Then eq. (4.62) becomes CΨM C = ηC ΨM .
Expanding ΨM in terms of creation and annihilation operators and using
eq. (4.59) we ﬁnd ap,s = ηC bp,s . Therefore for a Majorana spinor the
particle and the antiparticle are identical. As we already remarked in
Section 2.6.4, the relation between Majorana spinors and Dirac spinors
is similar to the relation between real scalar ﬁelds and complex scalar
ﬁelds. In both cases we have a reality condition (φ = φ∗ for a scalar
ﬁeld and Ψ = −iγ 2 Ψ∗ for a Dirac ﬁeld) which eliminates one half of the
degrees of freedom, and identiﬁes the particle with the antiparticle.10
As we mentioned in note 6, in the general case where the intrinsic
parity η is not assumed to be real, the parity of a fermion and an antifermion are related by ηa = −ηb∗ . Since for Majorana fermions the
particle is the same as the antiparticle, we have ηa = −ηa∗ and therefore
ηa = ±i.
Finally, we consider the time-reversal transformation T . The implementation of time reversal in quantum ﬁeld theory is somewhat peculiar.
In fact, the Wigner theorem states that a symmetry transformation can
be implemented either by a linear unitary operator, which is the case that
we have met until now, or by an anti-unitary and antilinear operator, i.e.
by an operator U that, given two states |a and |b with scalar product
a|b , satisﬁes U a|U b = a|b ∗ (instead of being equal to a|b as for a
unitary operator) and, for c a complex constant, U c|a = c∗ U |a . Time

4.2

reversal is indeed the case of a symmetry that can be implemented only
by an anti-unitary and antilinear operator (see Peskin and Schroeder
(1995), page 67).
We want to deﬁne T in such a way that T ΨT satisﬁes the time-reversed
Dirac equation. Using the antilinearity of T , it can be shown that this
can be obtained deﬁning
T ap,s T = a−p,−s ,

T bp,s T = b−p,−s

(4.64)

where ap,−s ≡ (ap,2 , −ap,1 ) and bp,−s ≡ (bp,2 , −bp,1). Therefore T
changes the sign of the momentum and ﬂips the spin, as we expect for
time reversal. On the Dirac ﬁeld this gives
T Ψ(t, x)T = −γ 1 γ 3 Ψ(−t, x) .

(4.65)

We leave it as an exercise to the reader to show that −γ 1 γ 3 Ψ(−t, x)
indeed veriﬁes the Dirac equation with t → −t.
Now that we have deﬁned C, P , and T on the ﬁeld Ψ, we can ask
whether the Lagrangian governing the dynamics of Ψ is invariant under these transformations. For the free Dirac action, one immediately
sees that C, P and T are indeed symmetry operations, but it is easy
to construct interaction terms with fermion bilinears and possibly with
derivatives that violate C, P or T separately. However, it is impossible
to write a Lorentz-invariant term that violates CP T . In fact, under
the combined action of C, P and T , the fermion bilinears Ψ̄Ψ, iΨ̄γ 5 Ψ,
and Ψ̄σ µν Ψ are invariant while Ψ̄γ µ Ψ and Ψ̄γ 5 γ µ Ψ change sign. To
construct a quadratic Lorentz-invariant term, the free Lorentz indices
in Ψ̄σ µν Ψ, Ψ̄γ µ Ψ and Ψ̄γ 5 γ µ Ψ must be contracted with a derivative
∂µ , while in quartic and higher-order terms the indices can also be contracted between the various fermion bilinears. Of course ∂µ is invariant
under C while under the combined action of P, T we have ∂µ → −∂µ .
We see that each free Lorentz index in a fermion bilinear constructed
with Ψ̄ and Ψ carries a minus sign under CP T , and the same is true for
the Lorentz index in ∂µ . Therefore all possible Lorentz invariant terms,
where all indices are contracted and therefore are even in number, are invariant under CP T . The fact that CP T is conserved, therefore, follows
from the fact that it is impossible even to write down a Lorentz-invariant
term that violates CP T .
This is an example of the CP T theorem, which states that, independently of the spin of the particle, a (local) Lorentz-invariant ﬁeld theory
with a hermitian Hamiltonian cannot violate CP T .
Since CP T exchanges a particle with the antiparticle, and is an exact
symmetry, i.e. it commutes with the Hamiltonian, it implies that the
mass of a particle and of its antiparticle must be exactly equal. Experimentally, this is veriﬁed to an extraordinary accuracy in the K 0 K̄ 0
system, where the bound on the mass diﬀerence is
|mK 0 − mK̄ 0 |
< 10−18 .
mK 0

(4.66)

Spin 1/2 ﬁelds 95

96 Quantization of free ﬁelds

4.3

Electromagnetic ﬁeld

4.3.1

Quantization in the radiation gauge

The quantization of the electromagnetic ﬁeld presents new aspects. The
core of the problem is that, because of gauge invariance, the ﬁeld Aµ
gives a redundant description. We have therefore two choices in the
quantization procedure. The ﬁrst possibility is to choose from the beginning a gauge such as the radiation gauge (3.150), which ﬁxes completely
the gauge freedom; in this case we work directly with the physical degrees of freedom, but the price that we have to pay is a loss of explicit
Lorentz covariance and at the end of the quantization procedure we must
verify that we have not really lost Lorentz symmetry. This quantization
scheme will be discussed in this section. The second possibility is to work
with the full gauge ﬁeld Aµ . This will introduce some spurious degrees
of freedom, which we will have to get rid of. This second quantization
procedure will be discussed in the next section.
Thus in this section we choose the radiation gauge (3.150), that we
recall here
∇·A = 0 .
(4.67)
A0 = 0 ,
We have seen that in this gauge the equation of motion for the three
residual components Ai is simply 2Ai = 0, so the most general classical
solution is



d3 p

(p, λ)ap,λ e−ipx + ∗ (p, λ)a∗p,λ eipx ,
A=
3
(2π) 2ωp λ=1,2
(4.68)
where, for the electromagnetic ﬁeld, we use the notation ωp ≡ p0 . Inserting this expansion in the equation of motion 2Ai = 0 we get p2 = 0
and therefore ωp = |p|; the gauge ﬁxing condition ∇·A = 0 requires
instead ·p = 0; this equation, for each ﬁxed p, has of course two independent solutions, the two orthogonal vectors, which we label by an
index λ = 1, 2. The physical degrees of freedom of the electromagnetic
ﬁeld are described by two independent polarization vectors (p, 1) and
(p, 2).
We now promote A to a hermitian operator, and we write


 
d3 p
†
−ipx
∗
ipx

e
+

(p,
λ)a
e
(p,
λ)a
,
A(x) =
p,λ
p,λ
(2π)3 2ωp λ=1,2
(4.69)
†
where now ap,λ , ap,λ are operators. Since for scalar ﬁelds we have understood that imposing on ap,λ , a†p,λ the commutation relation of the
harmonic oscillator allows us to interpret the states of the Fock space as
particles, we impose the commutation relations
[ap,λ , a†q,λ ] = (2π)3 δ (3) (p − q)δλλ

(4.70)

4.3

and

[ap,λ , aq,λ ] = [a†p,λ , a†q,λ ] = 0 .

Electromagnetic ﬁeld 97

(4.71)

Equations (4.70) and (4.71) are our deﬁning rules for the quantization
of the electromagnetic ﬁeld in the radiation gauge. We now want to
understand what this deﬁnition means in terms of the commutation
relations of the ﬁelds Ai with their conjugate momenta. The momentum
conjugate to A0 is


δ
1
µν
Π0 =
= 0.
(4.72)
− Fµν F
δ(∂0 A0 )
4
In this quantization scheme A0 and Π0 are equal to zero, and are not
dynamical variables. The momentum conjugate to Ai is instead




δ
δ
1
1
Πi =
− Fµν F µν =
− F0i F 0i = −F 0i = E i .
δ(∂0 Ai )
4
δ(∂0 Ai )
2
(4.73)
One can verify that from the commutation relations (4.70) it follows
that



ki kj
d3 k ik·(x−y)
ij
[Ai (t, x), E j (t, y)] = −i
−
e
δ
.
(4.74)
(2π)3
k2
In the derivation one uses the relation

1   i
ki kj
 (k, λ)j ∗ (k, λ) + i ∗ (−k, λ)j (−k, λ) = δ ij − 2 . (4.75)
2
k
λ=1,2

This identity can be veriﬁed choosing a frame where k = (0, 0, k). In
this frame we can choose as orthogonal vectors the linear polarization
vectors, i.e. (k, 1) = (1, 0, 0) and (k, 2) = (0, 1, 0), and eq. (4.75) is
then trivially checked. The validity in any frame follows from the fact
that both sides transform as tensors under rotations.11 The integral on
the right-hand side of eq. (4.74) is called a “transverse” Dirac delta and
ij
is denoted by δtr
(x − y), so we can write
ij
[Ai (t, x), E j (t, y)] = −iδtr
(x − y) .

(4.76)

Note that, were it not for the term k i k j /k2 , the integral over d3 k in
eq. (4.74) would give an ordinary Dirac delta, and we would have the
standard equal time commutation relations.12 The necessity of the term
k i k j /k2 can be understood taking the divergence with respect to x of
both sides of eq. (4.74); on the left-hand side we ﬁnd [∇·A(t, x), E(t, y)].
However, since we have imposed the gauge condition ∇·A = 0, this must
vanish. Indeed, the divergence of the right-hand side vanishes thanks to
the additional term −k i k j /k2 since, taking the divergence, inside the
integral we get


kikj
k i δ ij − 2
= kj − kj = 0 .
(4.77)
k
For the same reason, taking now the divergence of eq. (4.76) with respect
to y, we get [Ai (t, x), ∇·E(t, y)] = 0. This means that ∇·E commutes

11
The
linear
polarizations
are
real and therefore in this basis
the above identity simpliﬁes to
P
i
j
ij − ki kj .
λ=1,2  (k, λ) (k, λ) = δ
k2
However the form (4.75) holds also
choosing as a basis the circular
√ polarizations, i.e. (k,
√1) = (1/ 2)(1, i, 0)
and (k, 2) = (1/ 2)(1, −i, 0).
12

Observe that E i is the momentum
conjugate to Ai = −Ai . Therefore the
sign in eq. (4.76) is in agreement with
eq. (4.1).

98 Quantization of free ﬁelds

13

In particular, it is the equation of motion obtained performing the variation
with respect to A0 ; note that to choose
the gauge A0 = 0 means that we set
A0 = 0 in the solutions of the equations of motion, not directly in the action, otherwise we lose this equation of
motion. The classical solutions are deﬁned by the fact that the action must
be stationary with respect to all ﬁelds,
including A0 . Observe also that the
equation of motion ∇·E = 0 contains
no time derivative. Therefore it is not
an equation that determines the evolution of an initial ﬁeld conﬁguration, but
rather a constraint on the possible initial ﬁeld conﬁgurations.

with all operators and therefore, even in the quantum theory of the
free electromagnetic ﬁeld, it is a c-number, so it is consistent to impose
∇·E = 0 as an operator equation. Classically, ∇·E = 0 is just a Maxwell
equation in the absence of sources.13
We can now proceed with the standard construction of the Fock space.
We deﬁne the vacuum of the Fock space from
ap,λ |0 = 0

(4.78)

for all p and λ = 1, 2; the Fock space is then generated acting with the
creation operators a†p,λ . The quantum Hamiltonian is obtained normal
ordering the classical expression (3.158),


1
d3 k 
3
2
2
d x : E + B :=
H=
ωk a†k,λ ak,λ ,
(4.79)
2
(2π)3
λ=1,2

where ωk = |k|. The momentum is obtained from the normal ordering
of (3.159),


d3 k 
3
P = d x : E × B :=
k a†k,λ ak,λ .
(4.80)
(2π)3
λ=1,2

This shows that the state a†k,λ |0 describes a particle with energy ωk ,
momentum k and two polarization states λ = 1, 2. Since the dispersion
relation is ωk = |k|, it has zero mass. To compute its spin we must ﬁrst
compute the angular momentum operator of the electromagnetic ﬁeld
using the Noether theorem, and then we can study its action on the
one-particle states.
The reader who wishes to skip the
explicit calculation can go directly to
eq. (4.88).

It is instructive to perform the computation explicitly. We consider a rotation in the (jk) plane and we call J jk the associated conserved charge. The
angular momentum along the i axis J i is then given by J i = (1/2) ijk J jk .
From the Noether’s theorem J jk is given by the integral of the µ = 0 component of a current j µ(jk) , given by eq. (3.31)
»
–
Z
Z
∂L
(jk)
(aν(jk) ∂ν Ai − Fi ) − a0(jk) L .
J jk = d3 x j 0(jk) = d3 x
∂(∂0 Ai )
(4.81)
For a space-time rotation the coeﬃcients aµ(jk) (here we denote them by a
lower case letter in order not to create confusion with the gauge ﬁeld) have
µ
µ
0(jk)
= 0 and
been found in eq. (3.48), aµ
(ρσ) = δρ xσ − δσ xρ so in particular a
l(jk)
lj k
lk j
l(jk)
a
= δ x −δ x . The coeﬃcients a
measure the variation of the vector
xl under rotation, δxl = ω jk al(jk) . The coeﬃcients F l(jk) similarly measure
the variation of the gauge ﬁeld Ai under a rotation, and since Ai is a spatial
vector its transformation law is the same as xi , so that F i(jk) = δ ij Ak −δ ik Aj .
Therefore
Z
h
i
J jk = d3 x ∂0 Ai −(δ lj xk − δ lk xj )∂ l Ai − (δ ij Ak − δ ik Aj )
Z
h
i
= d3 x ∂0 Ai (xj ∂ k − xk ∂ j )Ai − (Ak ∂0 Aj − Aj ∂0 Ak ) . (4.82)

4.3
The ﬁrst term in the bracket is clearly the contribution from the orbital angular momentum. More precisely, it is the matrix element of the orbital angular
momentum operator Ljk = i(xj ∂ k − xk ∂ j ) with the same scalar product used
in the Klein–Gordon case; compare with eq. (3.50) and the discussion below
it. We are now interested in the second term which, according to the discussion after eq. (2.84), is the spin part S ij . Inserting the expansion (4.69) and
performing the normal ordering we get
Z
S ij = d3 x : Ai ∂0 Aj − Aj ∂0 Ai :
Z
X
d3 k
d3 q
√
√
= d3 x
(iωq )
(4.83)
3 2ω
3
(2π)
(2π) 2ωk
q  
λ λ
i
n h
× : i (k, λ )ak,λ e−ikx + i ∗ (k, λ )a†k,λ eikx
i o
h
× − j (q, λ )aq,λ e−iqx + j ∗ (q, λ )a†q,λ eiqx : − (i ↔ j) .
The integration over x of the various terms gives (2π)3 δ (3) (k ± q); then one
ﬁnds that the terms ∼ aa and a† a† cancel, while the terms obtained exchanging (i ↔ j) gives a factor of two, so
Z
i
d3 q X h i
(q, λ ) j ∗ (q, λ ) − i ∗ (q, λ ) j (q, λ ) a†q,λ aq,λ .
S ij = i
3
(2π)  
λ λ
(4.84)
Now we apply this operator to the one-particle state a†k,λ |0. Using
aq,λ a†k,λ |0 = [aq,λ , a†k,λ ] |0 = (2π)3 δ (3) (k − q)δλ λ |0
we ﬁnd
S ij a†k,λ |0 = i

X h i
λ =1,2

(4.85)

i
(k, λ) j ∗ (k, λ ) − i ∗ (k, λ ) j (k, λ) a†k,λ |0 . (4.86)

We choose k = (0, 0, k) and we compute the spin along the z axis, i.e. S 3 =
S 12 . As a basis for the polarization vectors we choose the linear polarizations,
(k, 1) = (1, 0, 0), (k, 2) = (0, 1, 0); in components i (k, λ) = δλi and
X 1 2
(δλ δλ − δλ2 δλ1  )a†k,λ |0 .
(4.87)
S 3 a†k,λ |0 = i
λ =1,2

The ﬁnal result of this calculation is therefore
S 3 a†k,1 |0 = ia†k,2 |0
S 3 a†k,2 |0 = −ia†k,1 |0 ,

(4.88)

with k = (0, 0, k). We see that the linear polarizations are not eigenstates of the helicity. The eigenstates are given by the circular polarizations,
S 3 a†k,+ |0 = +a†k,+ |0
where

S 3 a†k,− |0 = −a†k,− |0

(4.89)

1
a†k,± = √ (a†k,1 ± ia†k,2 ) .
2

(4.90)

Electromagnetic ﬁeld 99

100 Quantization of free ﬁelds

14
A note for the advanced reader. In
general, it is quite common in ﬁeld theory that, in the quantization procedure,
a symmetry of the classical Lagrangian
is not explicitly preserved in the intermediate steps, and at the end of the
quantization procedure one must check
whether the symmetry is still present in
the quantum theory. It turns out that
it is not at all automatic that such a
symmetry is recovered. If this does not
happen, the symmetry is called anomalous, and the theory is said to have an
anomaly. In QFT this can only happen
as a consequence of the divergences of
the interacting theory, that will be the
subject of the next chapter, and in a
free ﬁeld theory, such as the free electromagnetic ﬁeld that we are considering here, no anomaly can appear. For
this reason, the recovery of Lorentz invariance in the quantization of the free
electromagnetic ﬁeld is guaranteed. It
is however interesting to observe that
in string theory there is no distinction
between a free Lagrangian and an interaction term, i.e. the free propagation of the string ﬁxes also the interaction. It is possible to quantize the theory in a way very similar to the quantization in radiation gauge of the electromagnetic ﬁeld, breaking the explicit
Lorentz covariance, and one ﬁnds that
at the end Lorentz invariance is recovered only if the theory lives in 26 spacetime dimensions (for the bosonic string)
or in 10 space-time dimensions (for superstrings). See Polchinski (1998), Section 1.3, for a clear discussion.

The conclusion is that the states a†k,± |0 describe particles with momentum k, energy ωk = |k|, mass zero, spin 1, and helicity ±1. These
quanta are the photons. The fact that massless particles are helicity
eigenstates and that there is no state with Jz = 0 is in agreement with
our general discussion of the representation of the Poincaré group in
Section 2.7.2.
Our quantization procedure did not maintain Lorentz covariance, since
we broke it from the beginning with our gauge choice. We must therefore now ask whether at the end Lorentz invariance is recovered. The
fact that we found a particle which ﬁts within the representations of the
Poincaré group already indicates that the ﬁnal result is compatible with
Poincaré (and therefore Lorentz) invariance. To make sure that indeed
the theory has Lorentz invariance what we actually have to do is to construct all generators of the Poincaré group in terms of the creation and
annihilation operators. We already wrote explicitly the energy, momentum and the spin part of the angular momentum in eqs. (4.79), (4.80)
and (4.84) and the reader can complete it computing the orbital part
of the angular momentum, and the boost generator. Using the commutation relations of the creation and annihilation operators one can then
check that these generators indeed close the Lorentz algebra, and that
the one-particle states, under the transformations generated by these
generators, transform as expected for a spin-1 massless particle. This
proves the covariance of the quantization in the radiation gauge.14
Finally, we can deﬁne on the photon states the operations of parity
and charge conjugation. Concerning parity, we have understood that
the physical photon states are described by a vector ﬁeld A(t, x ), subject
to the condition ∇·A = 0. The gauge ﬁeld A is a true vector, as follows
for instance from the fact that the electric ﬁeld is a true vector and the
magnetic ﬁeld is a pseudovector, so under parity it transforms as
A(t, x ) → −A(t, −x ) .

(4.91)

Expanding each of the three components A(t, x ) in spherical harmonics,
under parity the terms with orbital angular momentum L get the usual
factor (−1)L from the transformation of the spherical harmonic YLM
under x → −x , plus an overall minus sign from the fact that A is a
vector. In terms of photon states, this means that
P |γ; k , s = −|γ; −k , s ,

(4.92)

where k , s are the momentum and spin of the photon γ. Therefore the
intrinsic parity of a physical photon state is −1.
We saw in eq. (4.63) that the fermionic current changes sign under
charge conjugation. Therefore, if we deﬁne C on the gauge ﬁeld as
CAµ C = −Aµ ,

(4.93)

then charge conjugation is a symmetry of the QED Lagrangian. On the
creation and annihilation operators of the photon, the above equation
means that
(4.94)
Cap,λ C = −ap,λ .

4.3

Electromagnetic ﬁeld 101

By deﬁnition, we take C|0 = +|0 . Then, since C 2 = 1, we have
Cap,λ |0 = (Cap,λ C) C|0 = −ap,λ |0 .

(4.95)

Therefore the photon has charge conjugation −1.

4.3.2

Covariant quantization

In this section we take a diﬀerent route for the quantization of the electromagnetic ﬁeld. We do not want to spoil the covariance, so we do not
impose the radiation gauge and we accept working with the redundant
ﬁeld Aµ . However, if we try to perform straightforwardly a covariant
quantization of the Maxwell Lagrangian,
1
L = − Fµν F µν ,
4

(4.96)

we fail immediately. In fact, in a naive covariant quantization, we would
ﬁrst of all deﬁne the conjugate momenta as
Πµ (x) =

∂L
,
∂(∂0 Aµ )

(4.97)

Consider ﬁrst the spatial components. The momentum conjugate to Ai
is Πi = −Πi , with Πi = E i . Equation (4.1) would therefore suggest
imposing the equal time commutation relations15
[Ai (t, x), Πj (t, y)] = −iδ ij δ (3) (x − y)

(4.98)

(the minus sign is due to the fact that the momentum conjugate to Ai
is Πi , and Πi = −Πi ), while
[Ai (t, x), Aj (t, y)] = 0 .

(4.99)

These commutation relations have the covariant generalization
[Aµ (t, x), Aν (t, y)] = 0 ,

(4.100)

[Aµ (t, x), Πν (t, y)] = iη µν δ (3) (x − y) .

(4.101)

The metric ηµν is forced upon us from the condition of Lorentz covariance, since the left-hand side is a tensor. In a covariant quantization,
one would therefore use eqs. (4.97), (4.100) and (4.101) as the starting
point. However, eqs. (4.97) and (4.101) are incompatible, because in the
Maxwell Lagrangian there is no dependence on ∂0 A0 and therefore Π0
vanishes identically, and cannot have a non-trivial commutator with A0 .
To tackle this problem we proceed as follows. We start from a modiﬁed
Lagrangian,
1
1
(4.102)
L = − Fµν F µν − (∂µ Aµ )2 .
4
2
This Lagrangian at ﬁrst sight seems to describe a very diﬀerent theory
compared to the Maxwell Lagrangian (4.96). Indeed, the Lagrangian

15

Observe that in the quantization in
radiation gauge of the previous section the commutator [Ai (t, x), Πj (t, y)]
was rather given in terms of a transverse Dirac delta, see eq. (4.76). This
was a consequence of our gauge ﬁxing, which eliminated from the beginning the longitudinal polarization vector, i.e. the vector i (k, 3) which, in
the frame where k = (0, 0, k), has the
form i (k, 3) = (0, 0, 1). Because of
this, the sum over the polarization gave
the transverse tensor δ ij − k i k j /k2 , see
eq. (4.75). The diﬀerence with the
covariant quantization is that now we
are not ﬁxing the gauge, and we keep
for the moment all polarization vectors.
Therefore, the sum over the spatial polarization vectors now gives δ ij rather
than δij − k i k j /k2 .

102 Quantization of free ﬁelds

(4.102) is not even gauge invariant. For the moment we postpone the
question of what the Lagrangian (4.102) has to do with (4.96), and we
proceed to its quantization. The conjugate momenta can now be deﬁned
straightforwardly
∂L
(4.103)
Πµ (x) =
∂(∂0 Aµ )
so that Πi = −F 0i = E i as in the usual Maxwell Lagrangian (4.96),
while Π0 = −∂µ Aµ is non-vanishing. It therefore makes perfectly sense
to impose the canonical commutation relations (4.101).
The equation of motion derived from eq. (4.102) is simply 2Aµ = 0.
The operators Aµ can therefore be expanded as


3 


d3 p
†
ipx
−ipx
∗

(p,
λ)a
e
(p,
λ)a
e
+

,

µ
p,λ
µ
p,λ
(2π)3 2ωp λ=0
(4.104)
and the equation of motion 2Aµ = 0 translates into p2 = 0. The
important diﬀerence compared to the canonical quantization discussed
in the previous section is that now there is no constraint on µ ; in the
canonical quantization the conditions 0 = 0 and pµ µ = 0 came from the
gauge choice, while here we start from a Lagrangian which is not even
gauge invariant, and no constraint has been imposed on Aµ . Therefore
we have four independent solutions for µ (p, λ), labeled by λ = 0, 1, 2, 3.
In the frame where pµ = (p, 0, 0, p) we will choose as a basis

Aµ (x) =

µ (p, 0) = (1, 0, 0, 0) ,

µ (p, 1) = (0, 1, 0, 0) ,

µ (p, 2) = (0, 0, 1, 0) ,

µ (p, 3) = (0, 0, 0, 1) ,

(4.105)

or, more compactly, µ (p, λ) = δλµ . In a generic frame the form of
µ (p, λ) is found performing the appropriate Lorentz transformation.
The two vectors µ (p, 1) and µ (p, 2) satisfy µ pµ = 0, i.e. they are
transverse. Instead µ (p, 0) and µ (p, 3) have µ pµ = 0.
From the expansion (4.104) and the canonical commutation relations
(4.101) it follows that
[ap,λ , a†q,λ ] = −(2π)3 δ (3) (p − q)ηλλ ,

(4.106)

with λ, λ = 0, 1, 2, 3, and [ap,λ , aq,λ ] = [a†p,λ , a†q,λ ] = 0. The crucial
new point here is that the commutator (4.106) with λ = λ = 0 has
the “wrong” sign, because η00 = +1. The consequence of this sign
apparently is a disaster. Consider the states
|p, λ ≡ (2ωp )1/2 a†p,λ |0

(4.107)

and try to interpret them as one-particle states. The norm of these
states is
p, λ|p, λ = (2ωp )0|ap,λ a†p,λ |0 = (2ωp )0|[ap,λ , a†p,λ ]|0 = −ηλλ 2ωp V
(4.108)

4.3

(where, in a ﬁnite volume, (2π)3 δ (3) (0) = V , see eq. (4.7)). Therefore,
the state created by the oscillator with λ = 0 has a negative norm! Since
the scalar products in quantum mechanics are interpreted as probabilities, a Fock space with a scalar product which is not positive deﬁnite
has no probabilistic interpretation.
On the other hand, we must observe that the states that create the
problem have no counterpart in the canonical quantization of the electromagnetic ﬁeld discussed in the previous section; we have seen in fact
that the physical states are only those associated with transverse polarization vectors. The states created by a†p,0 and by a†p,3 (in the frame
where p is along the third axis) are unphysical.
We must now recall that the theory that we have quantized so far is not
electrodynamics, because of the extra term (∂µ Aµ )2 in the Lagrangian.
The basic idea of the covariant quantization of the electromagnetic ﬁeld,
or Gupta–Bleuler quantization, is to start from the apparently diﬀerent
theory (4.102) and to recover a quantum theory of the electromagnetic
ﬁeld imposing a restriction on the Fock space: we deﬁne the subspace of
physical states requiring that for any two physical states |phys , |phys 
phys |∂µ Aµ |phys = 0 .

(4.109)

In other words, ∂µ Aµ = 0, rather than being imposed at the level of
the Lagrangian (4.102), is recovered as an operator equation on physical states, and we expect that the quantization of the theory (4.102),
supplemented with the condition (4.109), is equivalent to the canonical quantization studied in the previous section. We must therefore
study whether imposing the condition (4.109) is suﬃcient to eliminate
the states with negative norm from the physical space and whether the
ﬁnal result is a Fock space of transverse photons, as we expect from the
previous section.
We ﬁrst observe that the operator ∂µ Aµ can be separated into its
positive and negative frequency parts,
∂µ Aµ = (∂µ Aµ )+ + (∂µ Aµ )−

(4.110)

where (∂µ Aµ )+ contains only the positive frequency part, i.e. the annihilation operators, and (∂µ Aµ )− contains the creation operators,

(∂µ Aµ )+ = −i
µ −

(∂µ A ) = i



3

d3 p

pµ µ (p, λ)ap,λ e−ipx (4.111)
(2π)3 2ωp λ=0

3

d3 p

pµ µ∗ (p, λ)a†p,λ eipx .
(2π)3 2ωp λ=0

(4.112)

Since (∂µ Aµ )− = (∂µ Aµ )+† , eq. (4.109) is satisﬁed if we deﬁne the physical states from the condition
(∂µ Aµ )+ |phys = 0 ,

(4.113)

Electromagnetic ﬁeld 103

104 Quantization of free ﬁelds

since then automatically phys|(∂µ Aµ )− = 0 for any physical state.
Equation (4.113) will be taken as the deﬁnition of the physical subspace. Since it has the form of a linear operator applied to a state, it
preserves the linear structure of the physical Hilbert space: if |phys1
and |phys2 are physical states, then α|phys1 + β|phys2 is a physical
state.
Let us examine what
this condition means for one-particle states. We
consider a state |ψ = λ cλ a†k,λ |0 , i.e. the most general superposition
of polarization states with a given momentum k, and we choose k along
the third axis, k µ = (k, 0, 0, k). On this state the physical state condition
(4.113) becomes c0 + c3 = 0. We see that the two transverse photons
a†k,1 |0 and a†k,2 |0 , and any linear combination of them, are physical
states. This is good news, since we know from the previous section
that these are the true degrees of freedom of the photon. Consider
now the subspace generated by a†k,0 |0 and a†k,3 |0 . We see that neither
a†k,0 |0 nor a†k,3 |0 are physical states. This is also good news, since the
state a†k,0 |0 is just the negative norm state, and a†k,3 |0 , even if it has
a positive norm, does not correspond to a physical polarization state.
However the combination
|φ = (a†k,0 − a†k,3 )|0

(4.114)

has c0 = +1, c3 = −1 and satisﬁes the physical state condition c0 + c3 =
0. Therefore the most general one-particle state of the physical subspace,
with momentum k, is of the form
|ψT + c|φ

(4.115)

where |ψT is an arbitrary linear combination of the transverse states
a†k,1 |0 and a†k,2 |0 , |φ is given by eq. (4.114) and c is an arbitrary
constant. The question now is: what shall we do with |φ , which has no
counterpart in the canonical quantization?
First of all, observe that |φ has zero norm,
φ|φ = 0|(ak,0 − ak,3 )(a†k,0 − a†k,3 )|0 = 0|ak,0 a†k,0 + ak,3 a†k,3 |0
= 0|[ak,0 , a†k,0 ] + [ak,3 , a†k,3 ]|0 = 0 ,

(4.116)

because the commutator [ak,0 , a†k,0 ] has the opposite sign of [ak,3 , a†k,3 ].
This means that |φ is orthogonal to all physical states, since it is trivially
orthogonal to all states of the form |ψT , and is also orthogonal to itself.
Therefore all scalar products of |ψT + c|φ with any other physical state
are the same as the scalar product of |ψT .
Let us next look at the contribution of |φ to the energy and momentum. The energy and momentum in the covariant quantization are
found as usual from the Noether theorem and are




d3 k
†
†
−a
,
(4.117)
ω
a
+
a
a
H=
k
k,0
k,λ
k,0
k,λ
(2π)3
λ=1,2,3

4.3


P =



d3 k
k
−a†k,0 ak,0 +
3
(2π)


a†k,λ ak,λ ,

(4.118)

λ=1,2,3

and the minus sign in front of a†k,0 ak,0 is simply a consequence of Lorentz

covariance; the terms in brackets can in fact be written as −η λλ a†k,λ ak,λ .
Computing the matrix element of the energy and momentum operators
between physical states, the contribution from the term −a†k,0 ak,0 cancels that from the term a†k,3 ak,3 . In fact, the condition c0 + c3 = 0 can
be rewritten as
(4.119)
(ak,0 − ak,3 )|ψ = 0 .
Then
phys |− a†k,0 ak,0 + a†k,3 ak,3 |phys = phys |(−a†k,0 + a†k,3 )ak,3 |phys = 0 ,
(4.120)
where the ﬁrst equality follows from eq. (4.119) and the second from its
hermitian conjugate. This means that the contribution to the energy
and to the momentum comes only from the transverse oscillators, and
therefore, for one-particle states, it is determined completely by the
transverse part |ψT in eq. (4.115), and is independent of c|φ .
In conclusion, the states |ψT + c|φ and |ψT have the same energy,
momentum (and angular momentum, as can be checked similarly), and
they have the same scalar product with all physical states. Therefore
they are physically indistinguishable. We therefore introduce an equivalence relation, saying that |ψT is equivalent to |ψT ,
|ψT ∼ |ψT

(4.121)

|ψT = |ψT + c|φ .

(4.122)

if for some constant c

We then identify the photons as the equivalence classes with respect to
this relation. As a representative of the equivalence class we can conveniently take the purely transverse state |ψT . In any case, no physical
result depends on this choice. The photon is described by two transverse
degrees of freedom, and the energy, momentum (and angular momentum) coincide with those found performing the quantization in the radiation gauge. The generic multiparticle state is obtained tensoring this
physical one-particle state. As long as we quantize the free theory, this
gives a consistent quantization scheme. In an interacting theory, one
must however be careful to check that the interaction between physical
states does not produce unphysical states.

Summary of chapter
• The basic principle of the canonical quantization of a free scalar
ﬁeld is to promote the ﬁeld φ and its conjugate momentum to operators, and to impose the equal time commutation relation (4.1).

Electromagnetic ﬁeld 105

106 Quantization of free ﬁelds

Expanding the ﬁeld in plane waves, the coeﬃcients ap of the expansion become operators, and their complex conjugates a∗p become the hermitian conjugate operators a†p . The commutation
relation between ap and a†p is given by eq. (4.3) and shows that a
free scalar ﬁeld theory is equivalent to a collection of harmonic oscillators, one for each degree of freedom, labeled by the momentum
p.
• The Fock space is constructed in eqs. (4.8) and (4.9). It describes a
multiparticle space. The operator ap , acting on a state of the Fock
space, destroys a particle with momentum p , while a†p creates it.
This is a crucial aspect of quantum ﬁeld theory. The transition
amplitudes between diﬀerent states of the Fock space (that we
will learn to compute in the following chapters) describe processes
in which the number and the type of particle changes, something
which is impossible to describe using only ﬁrst-quantized wave
equations.
• The Hamiltonian and momentum operators are obtained from
the classical expressions, performing the normal ordering. Equa†
tions (4.16) and (4.20) show that the state a
p |0 is a one-particle
state with momentum p and energy Ep = p 2 + m2 .
• The quantization of complex ﬁelds gives rise to two diﬀerent kinds
of quanta, i.e. each particle has its antiparticle, which has the
same mass but opposite U (1) charge.
• Spinor ﬁelds are quantized imposing anticommutation relations,
eq. (4.31), and obey Fermi–Dirac statistics.
• The quantization of the electromagnetic ﬁeld has a complication
due to gauge invariance. One can choose between: (i) a description
in which only the physical degrees of freedom appear, at the price
of dealing in the intermediate steps with equations which are not
explicitly Lorentz covariant (Section 4.3.1), and (ii) a description
where Lorentz covariance is explicit, but in the intermediate steps
we must deal with spurious degrees of freedom (Section 4.3.2). In
any case, one ends up with a fully Lorentz and Poincaré invariant
theory, describing a massless particle with spin 1 and two helicity
states, the photon.

Exercises
(4.1) Positronium is a hydrogen-like bound state of an
electron and positron.
(i) Show that the parity of a positronium state with
orbital angular momentum L is P = (−1)L+1 .

positronium is an eigenstate of the charge conjugation operator, Ĉ|pos = C|pos. Show that, on a
positronium state with angular momentum L and
total spin S, the eigenvalue is C = (−1)L+S .

(ii) The charge conjugation operator Ĉ exchanges
the electron with the positron, and therefore

(iii) In QED parity and charge conjugation are conserved, and therefore the positronium states have

Exercises 107
well-deﬁned values of C and P . From the results
obtained above it follows that positronium states
also have L, S deﬁned. The state with S = 0 is
called para-positronium while S = 1 is called orthopositronium.
Show that the ground state of para-positronium
can decay into two photons while the ground state
of ortho-positronium cannot decay into two photons but can decay into three photons. We will
compute explicitly the decay rate for the annihilation in two photons in Exercise 7.2.

√
This shows that a†p / V create quanta that obey
the Bose–Einstein distribution.
(iii) Repeat the exercise for anticommuting operators and verify that one obtains Fermi–Dirac statistics.
(4.6) (i) Consider a gas of N electrons in a box of volume
V . Show that, in the ground state, the electrons ﬁll
all states with a momentum p such that |p |  pF ,
with pF given by

(4.2) Show that the quantity Ep δ (3) (p − k) is Lorentz
invariant and therefore the one-particle states have
a Lorentz-invariant normalization.

p3
N
= F2 .
V
3π

(4.3) Show that under charge conjugation Ψ̄γ µ Ψ changes
sign, where Ψ is the quantized ﬁeld operator.

The state with all levels ﬁlled up to pF is called
the Fermi vacuum and pF is called the Fermi momentum. We denote the Fermi vacuum by |0F to
distinguish it from the Fock vacuum |0, where all
levels are empty. The Fermi vacuum is the vacuum state of the system subject to the constraint
of a ﬁxed number of particle, N , while the Fock
vacuum is the vacuum state of the system with no
constraint on the particle number.

(4.4) Consider the Proca Lagrangian
1
1
L = − Fµν F µν + m2 Aµ Aµ ,
(4.123)
4
2
with m = 0.
(i) Verify that this theory is not gauge invariant and
show that the equations of motion derived from this
Lagrangian are
(2 + m2 )Aµ = 0 ,

∂ µ Aµ = 0 .

(4.124)

(ii) Perform the canonical quantization and verify
that the theory describes a massive spin-1 particle.
(4.5) (i) Let H be the second quantized Hamiltonian of a
free real scalar ﬁeld, see eq. (4.16), and β a number.
Prove the identity
e−βH a†p = a†p e−β(H+Ep ) .

(4.125)

(ii) According to the rules of quantum mechanics,
in a mixed state described by a density matrix ρ
the expectation value of any operator O is given by
Tr (ρO), when ρ is normalized by Tr ρ = 1. On a
thermal state with temperature T = 1/β the density matrix is ρ = e−βH /Tr e−βH and therefore the
thermal expectation values are deﬁned as
Tr Oe−βH
,
(4.126)
Tr e−βH
where the trace is over the Fock space. Using the
result obtained in (i), show that
Oβ =

(2π)3 δ (3) (p − q )
a†p aq β =
βEp
−1

e

(4.127)

(4.129)

(ii) Let ap,s , a†p,s be the usual annihilation and creation operators of the electron, introduced in Section 4.2.1. By deﬁnition ap,s |0 = 0 for all p . Verify that it is not true that ap,s |0F = 0 for all p . As
a consequence, a†p,s is not the appropriate operator
to describe the excitation above |0F . Deﬁne
Ap ,s = θ(|p | − pF )ap,s + θ(pF − |p |)a†−p ,−s
A†p ,s = θ(|p | − pF )a†p,s + θ(pF − |p |)a−p ,−s ,
(4.130)
where θ is the step function.
Verify that
Ap ,s |0F = 0 for all p and that Ap ,s and A†q ,r still
satisfy canonical anticommutation relations. Give
a physical interpretation of the action of A†q ,r on
|0F .
(iii) Equation (4.130) is a special case of a Bogoliubov transformation, which can be deﬁned both on
bosonic and on fermionic operators, as
Ap ,s = αp ap,s − βp a†−p ,−s
A†p ,s = α∗p a†p,s − βp∗ a−p ,−s ,

(4.131)

and therefore, in a ﬁnite volume V ,
a†p ap β =

V
e

βEp

−1

.

(4.128)

with αp , βp complex coeﬃcients (for the spin zero
case just omit the spin index s). Show that, in the

108 Quantization of free ﬁelds
bosonic case, the condition that Ap ,s and A†p ,s satisfy the canonical commutation relations requires
that

for simplicity the spatial volume V = 1) are A†p Ap
and a†p ap . Let |np  be an eigenstate of the operator a†p ap with eigenvalue np and deﬁne

|αp |2 − |βp |2 = 1 ,
αp β−p − α−p βp = 0 ,

Np ≡ np |A†p Ap |np  .
Show that

„

while for fermions
2

Np = np + 2|βp |

|αp |2 + |βp |2 = 1 ,
αp β−p + α−p βp = 0 .

(4.134)

(4.132)

(4.133)

(iv) Considering for notational simplicity the spin
zero case, let |0, a be the vacuum state annihilated
by the operators ap and |0, A be the vacuum state
annihilated by the operators Ap . Correspondingly
we have two diﬀerent type of particles, the “a”particles obtained acting with a†p on |0, a and the
“A”-particles obtained acting with A†p on |0, A.
The respective particle number operators (setting

1
np +
2

«
.

(4.135)

In particular, on the vacuum of the “a”-particles,
Np = |βp |2 . This means that, in terms of “A”particles, the vacuum of the “a”-particles is a multiparticle state.
Bogoliubov transformations of this type are used in
condensed matter physics, in the context of supeﬂuidity or superconductivity, and also in cosmology, to compute particle production by gravitational ﬁelds.

Perturbation theory and
Feynman diagrams

5

In Chapter 4 we studied the quantization of free ﬁelds. We now introduce
the interaction. In the canonical quantization, perturbation theory is
developed more easily using the Hamiltonian formalism (the Lagrangian
formalism is instead more useful in the path integral quantization that
will be discussed in Chapter 9). We therefore consider a general ﬁeld
theory with a Hamiltonian
H = H0 + Hint

(5.1)

where H0 is the free Hamiltonian and Hint is the interaction term. The
interaction term will be considered small. For instance in QED


(5.2)
Hint = d3 x Hint = − d3 x Lint
with
Lint = −eAµ Ψ̄γ µ Ψ

(5.3)

as discussed in Section 3.5.4. (Note that the identity Hint = −Lint holds
only when the interaction Lagrangian does not contain derivatives of the
ﬁelds.) The smallness of the interaction follows from the fact that the
parameter which turns out to be relevant for the perturbative expansion
is α = (e2 /4π)  1/137.
A useful toy model for learning the basic techniques is a quartic selfinteraction of a scalar ﬁeld. In this case H0 corresponds to the free
Klein–Gordon theory, and
Hint =

λ 4
φ ,
4!

(5.4)

with λ a dimensionless coupling constant. Perturbation theory will be
meaningful in the weak coupling regime, λ
1.

5.1

The S-matrix

In the Schrödinger picture we consider a state |a (t) which, at an initial
time Ti , is an eigenstate of a set of commuting operators, with eigenvalues labeled collectively by a. Typically, a will be the set of momenta
and spins of the incoming particles. Let us denote |a (Ti ) simply by

5.1 The S-matrix

109

5.2 LSZ reduction formula

111

5.3 Perturbative expansion

116

5.4 Feynman propagator

120

5.5 Feynman diagrams

122

5.6 Renormalization

135

5.7 Vacuum energy and the
cosmological constant

141

5.8 The modern point of view
on renormalizability
144
5.9 Running couplings

146

110 Perturbation theory and Feynman diagrams

|a . Similarly, we consider a state |b (t) that, at a ﬁnal time Tf , is an
eigenstate with eigenvalues b, and we denote |b (Tf ) simply as |b .
The state |a (t) evolves as |a (t) = e−iH(t−Ti ) |a and therefore at the
ﬁnal time Tf it has evolved into e−iH(Tf −Ti ) |a . The amplitude for the
process in which the initial state |a evolves into the ﬁnal state |b is
therefore given by
(5.5)
b|e−iH(Tf −Ti ) |a .
In the limit Tf − Ti → ∞ the evolution operator e−iH(Tf −Ti ) , with H
the second quantized Hamiltonian of ﬁeld theory, is called the S-matrix.
Therefore S is an operator that maps an initial state to a ﬁnal state,
|a → S|a ,

(5.6)

and the scattering amplitudes are given by its matrix elements, b|S|a .
Observe that S is a unitary operator, SS † = S † S = 1. In fact, if |a
is an initial state, normalized as a|a = 1, and |n is a complete set
of states, the probability that |a evolves into |n , summed over all |n ,
must be 1,

|n|S|a |2 = 1 .
(5.7)
n

On the other hand we can write


|n|S|a |2 =
a|S † |n n|S|a = a|S † S|a ,
n

(5.8)

n


since |n is a complete set and therefore n |n n| = 1. This means that
a|S † S|a = 1 for |a arbitrary, and we conclude that S † S = SS † = 1.
We see that the unitarity of the S-matrix expresses the conservation of
probability. It is also convenient to deﬁne the T matrix, separating the
identity operator,
S = 1 + iT .
(5.9)
In terms of T the condition SS † = 1 becomes
−i(T − T † ) = T T † .

(5.10)

Denoting the matrix element b|T |a by Tba , and inserting a complete
set of states, the above equation reads

∗
∗
)=
Tbn Tan
,
(5.11)
−i(Tba − Tab
n

and in particular, if a = b,
2 Im Taa =



|Tan |2 .

(5.12)

n

Therefore unitarity relates the imaginary part of the diagonal matrix
element Taa to the squared modulus of |Tan |2 , summed over all possible
intermediate states.
In quantum ﬁeld theory the Heisenberg representation is often more
useful than the Schrödinger representation. The reason is that in QFT

5.2

the operators are just the ﬁelds, so in the Heisenberg representation
the quantum ﬁelds depend both on x and t while in the Schrödinger
representation they depend only on x . The Heisenberg representation
is therefore more natural from the point of view of Lorentz covariance.
Given a state |a (t) in the Schrödinger representation, in the Heisenberg picture we deﬁne the state |a H as |a H = eiHt |a (t). If A is an operator in the Schrödinger representation, the corresponding Heisenberg
operator AH is deﬁned as AH (t) = eiHt Ae−iHt . Since |a (t) evolves with
e−iHt , and A is time-independent, by deﬁnition in the Heisenberg picture the states |a H are independent of t while the operators AH evolve
with time. Writing |a H = eiHt |a (t) at time t = Ti and recalling that
we denoted |a (Ti ) simply as |a , we can write
|a, Ti H = eiHTi |a .

(5.13)

Note that, even if it is time-independent, the Heisenberg state |a H carries a label Ti which was implicit in the deﬁnition of |a , and therefore
we have denoted it as |a, Ti H . This label tells us of what Heisenberg
operator the state |a, Ti H is an eigenvector. For instance, suppose that
in the Schrödinger representation the state |x0 , at t = t0 , is an eigenvector of the position operator x̂, and let x̂H (t) = eiHt x̂e−iHt . Then the
state |x0 , t0 H = eiHt |x0 (t) is an eigenvector of the Heisenberg position
operator x̂H (t0 ) but it is not an eigenvector of the operator x̂H (t1 ) with
t1 = t0 .
Similarly to eq. (5.13) (and omitting hereafter the subscript “H” on
states in the Heisenberg representation), we have
|b, Tf = eiHTf |b ,

(5.14)

and in terms of the states in the Heisenberg picture the matrix element
(5.5) is written as
b|S|a = b, Tf |a, Ti .
(5.15)

5.2

The LSZ reduction formula

Consider a generic S-matrix element written in the Heisenberg picture,
p1 , p2 , . . . , pn ; Tf |k1 , k2 , . . . , km ; Ti .

(5.16)

It is understood that at the end of the computation Tf → +∞ and
Ti → −∞. For notational simplicity we consider a single species of
neutral scalar particle, so the states are labeled just by their momenta,
but all our considerations can be generalized to particles with spin. Our
ﬁrst step will be to relate this matrix element to the expectation value
of some operator on the vacuum state.
We begin by observing that the expansion of a free real scalar ﬁeld in
terms of creation and annihilation operators, eq. (4.2), can be inverted

The LSZ reduction formula 111

112 Perturbation theory and Feynman diagrams

to give


↔

(2Ek )1/2 ak = i

d3 x eikx ∂0 φfree ,

↔
1/2 †
(2Ek ) ak = −i d3 x e−ikx ∂0 φfree ,

1

The most important example where
the interaction does not decrease at
large distances is the interaction of
quarks in QCD. As a consequence,
quarks are not seen as free particles
(they are “conﬁned” inside hadrons),
and the free particles seen at t → ±∞
are rather the hadrons. We will discuss
in Problem 8.2 how to proceed in these
cases.

Using a technique known as Källen–
Lehmann representation (see Weinberg
(1995), Section 10.7) one can show that
eq. (5.19) cannot hold as an operator equation, since otherwise one would
ﬁnd that Z = 1 and that φ is a free ﬁeld;
see, e.g., Itzykson and Zuber (1980),
Section 5.1.2.

(5.18)

as one easily veriﬁes substituting eq. (4.2) in the above equations and
performing the integration over d3 x. Note that in eqs. (5.17) and (5.18)
the integrands are time-dependent but the integrals are independent of
t. We have denoted the ﬁeld by φfree to stress that eqs. (5.17) and (5.18)
hold only if the ﬁeld is free. When the ﬁeld is not free, it cannot be
expanded in terms of creation and annihilation operators as in eq. (4.2),
and eqs. (5.17) and (5.18) do not hold.
However, as t → −∞ we intuitively expect that the theory reduces to
a free theory, since all incoming particles are inﬁnitely far apart and, if
the interaction decreases suﬃciently fast with the distance, there will be
no diﬀerence between a free and an interacting theory.1 These intuitive
considerations are formalized by the hypothesis that, as t → −∞,
φ(x) → Z 1/2 φin (x) ,

(5.19)

where φin (x) is a free ﬁeld and Z is a c-number, known as wave function
renormalization. We will discuss later the physical meaning of Z, and
how to compute it. Similarly we assume that, as t → +∞,
φ(x) → Z 1/2 φout (x) ,

2

(5.17)

(5.20)

with φout again a free ﬁeld, and the same constant Z. The limits in
eqs. (5.19) and (5.20) must be understood in the weak sense, i.e. they
are assumed to hold not as operator equations, but only when we take
matrix elements.2
We now consider eq. (5.18) with φin playing the role of the free
ﬁeld φfree . As we observed above, the integrand in eq. (5.18) is timedependent, but the result of the integration is independent of t. We can
therefore perform it at t → −∞, and use eq. (5.19) to write

↔
1/2 †,(in)
= −i
d3 x e−ikx ∂0 φin
(2Ek ) ak
t→−∞

↔
= −iZ −1/2 lim
(5.21)
d3 x e−ikx ∂0 φ ,
t→−∞

where the superscript “in” means that the operator a†k acts on the space
of initial states at Ti = −∞. Similarly, we deﬁne creation operators
acting on the ﬁnal states as

↔
†,(out)
= −i
d3 x e−ikx ∂0 φout
(2Ek )1/2 ak
t→+∞

↔
= −iZ −1/2 lim
(5.22)
d3 x e−ikx ∂0 φ .
t→+∞

5.2

The LSZ reduction formula 113

Observe that in eqs. (5.21) and (5.22) the ﬁnal integral depends on time,
†,(in)
since it is performed with φ rather than with a free ﬁeld; ak
is deﬁned
†,(out)
taking the limit t → −∞ of this integral while ak
is deﬁned taking
the limit t → +∞, and the relation between in and out creation operators is non-trivial. Recalling our normalization (4.10) for one-particle
states, we see that we can eliminate the particle with momentum k1
from the initial state writing
p1 , p2 , . . . , pn ; Tf |k1 , k2 , . . . km ; Ti
†,(in)

(5.23)
= (2Ek1 )1/2 p1 , p2 , . . . , pn ; Tf |ak1 |k2 , . . . , km ; Ti

↔
= −iZ −1/2 lim
d3 x e−ik1 x p1 , p2 , . . . , pn ; Tf | ∂0 φ|k2 , . . . , km ; Ti .
t→−∞

The idea is to iterate the process removing all particles from the initial
and ﬁnal states. We perform the computation in detail.
First of all, eq. (5.23) can be written in an explicitly covariant form. We
use the fact that, for any integrable function f (t, x ), we have the identity
Z
Z
Z ∞
∂
d3 x f (t, x ) .
( lim − lim ) d3 x f (t, x ) =
(5.24)
dt
t→+∞
t→−∞
∂t
−∞
↔

Applying this identity to the function f (t, x ) = −iZ −1/2 e−ikx ∂0 φ and using
eqs. (5.21) and (5.22) we ﬁnd
Z
↔
†,(in)
†,(out)
(2Ek )1/2 (ak
− ak
) = iZ −1/2 d4 x ∂0 (e−ikx ∂0 φ) .
(5.25)
The integral in this equation can be written in a covariant form observing that
Z
Z
↔
d4 x ∂0 (e−ikx ∂0 φ) = d4 x ∂0 (e−ikx ∂0 φ − φ ∂0 e−ikx )
Z
= d4 x (e−ikx ∂02 φ − φ∂02 e−ikx )
Z
i
h
= d4 x e−ikx ∂02 φ − φ(∇2 − m2 ) e−ikx , (5.26)
where in the last line we used the fact that k 2 = m2 , since kµ is the fourmomentum of an initial or ﬁnal particle with mass m, and therefore ∂02 e−ikx =
(∇2 − m2 )e−ikx . It is understood that our initial and ﬁnal particle states,
which we have written simply as states with deﬁnite momentum, i.e. plane
waves, will be convoluted to form wave packets, so at each given time they
are localized in space. This means that we can integrate ∇2 twice by parts
(while ∂0 cannot be integrated by parts, since φ is not localized in time), and
we ﬁnd
Z
†,(in)
†,(out)
(2Ek )1/2 (ak
− ak
) = iZ −1/2 d4 x e−ikx (2 + m2 )φ(x) .
(5.27)
Therefore
†,(in)

†,(out)

(2Ek1 )1/2 p1 , p2 , . . . , pn ; Tf |ak1 − ak1
|k2 , . . . , km ; Ti 
(5.28)
Z
= iZ −1/2 d4 x e−ik1 x (2 + m2 ) p1 , p2 , . . . , pn ; Tf |φ(x)|k2 , . . . , km ; Ti  .

The reader uninterested in the derivation can just take note of the definition of time-ordered product in
eq. (5.32) and then can jump directly
to eq. (5.40).

114 Perturbation theory and Feynman diagrams
†,(out)

3

In the language of Feynman diagrams
that we will explain below, this means
that we can restrict to connected diagrams.

The operator ak1
acts on the state to its left, destroying an out particle with
momentum k1 . We assume that none of the initial momenta pj coincides with
a ﬁnal momentum ki . This eliminates processes in which one of the particles
behaves as a “spectator” and does not interact with the other particles.3 Then
†,(out)
ak1
acting on the state on its left gives zero, because the particle that it
would annihilate is absent, and the left-hand side of eq. (5.28) coincides with
the expression that appears in eq. (5.23).
The conclusion is that we can remove the particle with momentum k1 from
the initial state, at the price of inserting the operator
Z
(5.29)
iZ −1/2 d4 x e−ik1 x (2 + m2 )φ(x)
in the matrix element, i.e.
(5.30)
p1 , p2 , . . . , pn ; Tf |k1 , k2 , . . . , km ; Ti 
Z
−1/2
4
−ik1 x
2
d xe
(2 + m ) p1 , p2 , . . . , pn ; Tf |φ(x)|k2 , . . . , km ; Ti  .
= iZ
Now we would like to iterate the procedure, eliminating all initial and ﬁnal particles and remaining with the vacuum expectation value of some combination
of ﬁelds. For instance, we next eliminate the ﬁnal particle with momentum
p1 . Following the same strategy adopted before, we write
p1 , p2 , . . . , pn ; Tf |φ(x)|k2 , . . . , km ; Ti 
= (2Ep1 )1/2 p2 , . . . , pn ; Tf |a(out)
φ(x)|k2 , . . . , km ; Ti  .
p1

(5.31)

We now deﬁne the time-ordered product, or simply the T -product, of two ﬁelds
as follows,
j
T {φ(y)φ(x)} =

y 0 > x0
y 0 < x0

φ(y)φ(x)
φ(x)φ(y)

(5.32)

or
T {φ(y)φ(x)} = θ(y 0 − x0 )φ(y)φ(x) + θ(x0 − y 0 )φ(x)φ(y) ,
0

0

0

0

(5.33)
0

where θ(x ) is the step function: θ(x ) = 1 if x > 0 and θ(x ) = 0 if x < 0.
(in)
Taking the hermitian conjugate of eq. (5.21) we see that ap1 is constructed
0
in terms of φ(y) with y → −∞, and therefore
(in)
T {a(in)
p1 φ(x)} = φ(x)ap1 .
(out)

Similarly, ap1

(5.34)

is constructed in terms of φ(y) with y 0 → +∞ and
(out)
T {a(out)
p1 φ(x)} = ap1 φ(x) .

(5.35)

We can use this to write the right-hand side of eq. (5.31) as
− a(in)
(2Ep1 )1/2 p2 , . . . , pn ; Tf |T {(a(out)
p1 )φ(x)}|k2 , . . . , km ; Ti  .
p1

(5.36)

In fact, the ﬁrst term in the T -product is the same as the original expression in
(in)
eq. (5.31), while the second gives zero since we have seen that T {ap1 φ(x)} =
(in)
(in)
φ(x)ap1 and then ap1 annihilates the state on its right (recall that we are
assuming that the ﬁnal momenta pj are diﬀerent from any of the initial momenta ki ).

5.2
(out)

The LSZ reduction formula 115

(in)

The advantage of the form (5.36) is that the combination ap1 − ap1 is
given in terms of a covariant expression involving the φ ﬁeld, which is just the
hermitian conjugate of eq. (5.27),
Z
−1/2
d4 y eip1 y (2y + m2 )φ(y) .
− a(in)
(5.37)
(2Ep1 )1/2 (a(out)
p1
p1 ) = iZ
Therefore
p1 , p2 , . . . , pn ; Tf |φ(x)|k2 , . . . , km ; Ti 
(5.38)
Z
= iZ −1/2 d4 y eip1 y (2y + m2 ) p2 , . . . , pn ; Tf |T {φ(y)φ(x)}|k2 , . . . , km ; Ti  ,
where 2y = ∂y∂µ ∂y∂µ .4 Putting together eqs. (5.30) and (5.38) we ﬁnd the
result of eliminating the particles with momenta k1 and p1 ,
p1 , p2 , . . . , pn ; Tf |k1 , k2 , . . . , km ; Ti 
Z
Z
= (iZ −1/2 )2 d4 x e−ik1 x (2x + m2 ) d4 y e+ip1 y (2y + m2 )

(5.39)

× p2 , . . . , pn ; Tf |T {φ(y)φ(x)}|k2 , . . . , km ; Ti  .

The procedure can now be iterated in a straightforward way, and the
result is
p1 , . . . , pn ; Tf |k1 , . . . , km ; Ti
 
m
m
n
n



4
4
−1/2 n+m
pj y j − i
ki xi )
)
d xi
d yj exp(i
= (iZ
i=1

j=1
2

j=1

i=1

×(2x1 + m ) . . . (2yn + m )0|T {φ(x1 ) . . . φ(yn )}|0 ,
2

(5.40)

where the T -product T {φ(x1 ) . . . φ(yn )} by deﬁnition orders the n +
m ﬁelds φ(x1 ), . . . , φ(ym ) according to decreasing times, so that larger
times are leftmost. The vacuum at t = ±∞ is the perturbative vacuum,
i.e. the vacuum used in the construction of the Fock space of the free
theory.5
As we explained in Section 5.1, p1 . . . pn ; Tf |k1 . . . km ; Ti is the matrix element in the Heisenberg representation. In the Schrödinger representation we write instead
p1 . . . pn |S|k1 . . . km .

(5.41)

We have also deﬁned the operator T from S = 1 + iT . Since in eq. (5.40)
we restricted to the situation in which no initial and ﬁnal momenta coincide, the matrix element of the identity operator between these states
vanishes, and we have actually computed the matrix element of iT , i.e.
of the non-trivial part of the evolution operator,
p1 . . . pn |iT |k1 . . . km
 
m
n
m
n



= (iZ −1/2 )n+m
d4 xi
d4 yj exp(i
pj y j − i
ki xi )
i=1

j=1
2

j=1

i=1

×(2x1 + m ) . . . (2yn + m )0|T {φ(x1 ) . . . φ(yn )}|0 .
2

(5.42)

4
A very technical remark: writing
eq. (5.38) we have extracted 2y from
the T -product; strictly speaking this
is not correct, because ∂/∂y 0 does
not commute with the theta function
that enters in the deﬁnition of the T product, since ∂x θ(x) = δ(x). However, a simple calculation shows that
the additional term is proportional to
δ(x0 − y 0 )[∂0 φ(y), φ(x)] ∼ δ (4) (x − y),
and the inclusion of this Dirac delta
(and of its derivatives, coming from acting on it with the 2x operators present
in the LSZ formula) modiﬁes the ﬁnal
result for the LSZ formula, eq. (5.46),
by the addition of terms which are polynomial in the four-momenta. Since
however both the left-hand side and the
right-hand side of eq. (5.46) are polelike in the four-momenta, i.e. proportional to factors 1/(p2 − m2 ), the addition of a regular term is irrelevant
when we go on mass shell, i.e. when we
set p2 = m2 ; see the discussion below
eq. (5.46).
5

Observe that initial one-particle
states are deﬁned from |k 
=
(2Ek )1/2 ak †,(in) |0 and ﬁnal states
from |k  = (2Ek )1/2 ak †,(out) |0,
with the same state |0 in both cases,
including its phase.

116 Perturbation theory and Feynman diagrams

We now deﬁne the N -point Green’s function
G(x1 , . . . , xN ) = 0|T {φ(x1 ) . . . φ(xN )}|0 .
In terms of its Fourier transform G̃, we have
 
N
d4 ki −i PN
i=1 xi ki G̃(k , . . . , k
G(x1 , . . . , xN ) =
e
1
N) .
4
(2π)
i=1

(5.43)

(5.44)

Using
(2xj + m2 )G(x1 , . . . , xN )
 
N
PN
d4 ki
(kj2 − m2 )e−i i=1 xi ki G̃(k1 , . . . , kN ) ,
=−
4
(2π)
i=1

(5.45)

eq. (5.42) can be rewritten as
m 

i=1

=

d4 xi e−iki xi

n 


d4 yj e+ipj yj

j=1

×0|T {φ(x1 ) . . . φ(xm )φ(y1 ) . . . φ(yn )}|0
⎞
⎛
√
√
n

i
Z
i Z
⎠ p1 . . . pn |iT |k1 . . . km .
⎝
k 2 − m2
p2 − m2
j=1 j
i=1 i

m


(5.46)

This is the Lehmann–Symanzik–Zimmermann (LSZ) reduction formula.
It is important to understand the meaning of the factors ki2 − m2 and
p2j − m2 in the denominator. Of course for a physical particle with fourmomentum pµ we have p2 −m2 = 0 (which is often expressed saying that
the particle is “on mass shell”). The meaning of these factors is that
we must ﬁrst compute the left-hand side of eq. (5.46) working oﬀ mass
shell, i.e. without using any relation between p20 and p2 . In the limit
in which we send the particles on mass shell, the left-hand side develops
poles of the form 1/(ki2 − m2 ) for each incoming particle and 1/(p2j − m2 )
for each outgoing particle. These factors cancel the same pole factors
which appear explicitly on the right-hand side, and we remain with an
equation between quantities that are ﬁnite when the particles are on
mass shell.
We have therefore succeeded in relating the scattering amplitude to
the vacuum expectation value of a time-ordered product of ﬁelds. In the
next section we will see how the latter can be computed order by order
in perturbation theory.

5.3

Setting up the perturbative expansion

At the classical level, the ﬁeld φ(x) satisﬁes a complicated non-linear
equation of motion, determined by the full Lagrangian L0 + Lint which

5.3

Setting up the perturbative expansion 117

corresponds to the full Hamiltonian H0 + Hint . The exact form of the
solution will in general be very diﬃcult to obtain, but certainly it will not
be given just by simple plane waves, and so φ(x) does not have a simple
expansion in plane waves with coeﬃcients that in the quantum theory
can be interpreted as creation and annihilation operators. In order to
set up the perturbative expansion, we want to relate φ to a ﬁeld φI
whose time evolution is instead determined just by the free Hamiltonian
H0 . We therefore deﬁne a quantum ﬁeld φI (t, x) stating that, if at some
reference time t = t0 it is equal to φI (t0 , x), then at generic t it is given
by
φI (t, x) = eiH0 (t−t0 ) φI (t0 , x)e−iH0 (t−t0 ) .
(5.47)
The ﬁeld φI that evolves with the free Hamiltonian is called the interaction picture ﬁeld. By deﬁnition this is a free ﬁeld and we can expand
it as



d3 p

ap e−ipx + a†p eipx ,
(5.48)
φI (t, x) =
3
(2π) 2Ep
with ap , a†p the usual destruction and annihilation operators. Now we
want to express the full Heisenberg ﬁeld φ in terms of φI . At time t0 the
ﬁeld φ(x) is a given function of the spatial coordinates, φ(t0 , x ) = f (x ).
Let φI (t, x) be the interaction picture ﬁeld that at t = t0 is equal to the
same function f (x). Then (setting t − t0 ≡ τ )
φ(t, x) = eiHτ φ(t0 , x)e−iHτ

= eiHτ e−iH0 τ e+iH0 τ φ(t0 , x)e−iH0 τ eiH0 τ e−iHτ
= eiHτ e−iH0 τ φI (t, x)eiH0 τ e−iHτ .

(5.49)

It is therefore useful to deﬁne the time evolution operator
U (t, t0 ) ≡ eiH0 (t−t0 ) e−iH(t−t0 ) ,

(5.50)

which evolves from time t0 to time t, and is unitary. Then
φ(t, x) = U † (t, t0 )φI (t, x)U (t, t0 ) .

(5.51)

Note that U (t, t0 ) = exp{i(H0 − H)(t − t0 )} = exp{−iHint (t − t0 )}
because H0 and Hint do not commute, and therefore we cannot combine
the exponentials in this way. However, one can observe that
∂U
= eiH0 (t−t0 ) (H −H0 )e−iH(t−t0 ) = eiH0 (t−t0 ) Hint e−iH0 (t−t0 ) U (t, t0 ) .
∂t
(5.52)
We deﬁne the interaction picture Hamiltonian HI as

i

HI (t) = eiH0 (t−t0 ) Hint e−iH0 (t−t0 ) .

(5.53)

The solution of eq. (5.52) with the boundary condition U (t0 , t0 ) = 1 is
  t
U (t, t0 ) = T exp −i
dt HI (t )
.
(5.54)
t0

118 Perturbation theory and Feynman diagrams

We recall that the exponential of an operator is deﬁned by its Taylor
expansion. Then the time-ordering T of the exponential means that all
terms in the Taylor expansion are time ordered. The fact that this is
a solution of eq. (5.52) can be checked expanding the exponential and
comparing order by order in HI . Equations (5.51), (5.53) and (5.54)
express the ﬁeld φ(t, x) in terms of the interaction picture ﬁeld.
Our task is to compute the n-point Green’s function, i.e.
0|φ(x1 )φ(x2 ) . . . φ(xn )|0

(5.55)

when the xi are T -ordered, i.e. t1 > t2 > . . . > tn . Then, using
eq. (5.51), we can rewrite it as



0| U † (t1 , t0 )φI (x1 )U (t1 , t0 ) U † (t2 , t0 )φI (x2 )U (t2 , t0 ) . . .


(5.56)
. . . U † (tn , t0 )φI (xn )U (tn , t0 ) |0 .
Observe now that U † (t2 , t0 ) = U (t0 , t2 ), since the hermitian conjugation
changes i → −i in the exponent in eq. (5.54), and this is reabsorbed inverting the integration limits. Furthermore, U (t1 , t0 )U (t0 , t2 ) = U (t1 , t2 ).
A simple derivation of this identity (valid independently of the ordering
between t0 , t1 , t2 ) is obtained observing that

∂
∂
U (t, t0 ) U (t0 , t2 ) = HI (t)[U (t, t0 )U (t0 , t2 )].
i [U (t, t0 )U (t0 , t2 )] = i
∂t
∂t
(5.57)
Therefore the equation satisﬁed by [U (t, t0 )U (t0 , t2 )] is the same as that
satisﬁed by U (t, t0 ), eq. (5.52), but the boundary condition is
[U (t, t0 )U (t0 , t2 )]|t=t0 = U (t0 , t2 ) ,

(5.58)

since U (t0 , t0 ) = 1. The solution with this boundary condition is
  t
dt HI (t )
.
(5.59)
U (t, t0 )U (t0 , t2 ) = T exp −i
t2

However, this is nothing but U (t, t2 ), as we see comparing with eq. (5.54).
Using these identities we can combine the various factors U , U † in
eq. (5.56) and we get
0|U † (t1 , t0 )φI (x1 )U (t1 , t2 )φI (x2 )U (t2 , t3 ) . . .
. . . U (tn−1 , tn )φI (xn )U (tn , t0 )|0 .

(5.60)

We now introduce a new variable t with a very large value, so that
−t. Using U (tn , t0 ) = U (tn , −t)U (−t, t0 ) and
t
t1 > t2 > . . . > t n
U † (t1 , t0 ) = U (t0 , t1 ) = U (t0 , t)U (t, t1 ) = U † (t, t0 )U (t, t1 ), we rewrite
(5.60) as
0|U † (t, t0 ) [U (t, t1 )φI (x1 )U (t1 , t2 )φI (x2 )U (t2 , t3 ) . . .
. . . U (tn−1 , tn )φI (xn )U (tn , −t)] U (−t, t0 )|0 .

(5.61)

Observe that the term in brackets is automatically time-ordered. In fact,
e.g. U (t1 , t2 ) contains powers of the integral of HI (t) between t1 and t2 ,

5.3

Setting up the perturbative expansion 119

time ordered, so terms like φI (x1 )U (t1 , t2 )φI (x2 ) are sums of terms of
the form φI (x1 )HI (t1 ) . . . HI (tk )φI (x2 ) with t1 > t1 > . . . > tk > t2 , so
everything is automatically time ordered. Therefore the term in square
brackets can be rewritten as
[. . .] = T {φI (x1 ) . . . φI (xn )U (t, t1 )U (t1 , t2 ) . . . U (tn , −t)} .

(5.62)

We have rewritten the various factors in a convenient order, since anyway
the order in which they appeared in eq. (5.61) is implemented by the
T -product symbol. Now however we can combine the U factors into a
single factor U (t, −t). We therefore arrive at
  t
dt HI (t ) U (−t, t0 )|0 .
0|U † (t, t0 )T φI (x1 ) . . . φI (xn ) exp −i
−t

(5.63)
Note that the T -product symbol in eq. (5.54) need not be repeated inside
(5.63) because the outmost T -product symbol already instructs to time
order all its arguments.
These manipulations hold for t0 arbitrary. We now chose t0 = −t and
we send t → ∞. Then U (−t, t0 ) = 1 while U † (t, t0 ) → U † (∞, −∞).
The term 0|U † (∞, −∞) in eq. (5.63) is the hermitian conjugate of
U (∞, −∞)|0 , which is the state obtained evolving the vacuum state
from time −∞ to +∞. Physically it is clear that, if the vacuum state is
stable, applying to it the evolution operator U (∞, −∞) we still ﬁnd the
vacuum. Recall however that in quantum mechanics state vectors that
diﬀer by a phase still represent the same physical state. Therefore we
will have in general
(5.64)
U (∞, −∞)|0 = eiα |0 ,
with α a phase. The explicit form of this phase can be obtained taking
the scalar product of the above equation with 0| and using the explicit
form (5.54) of the evolution operator,
  +∞
iα
e = 0|T exp −i
dt HI (t ) |0 .
(5.65)
−∞

In eq. (5.63) the hermitian conjugate, 0|U † (∞, −∞) = e−iα 0| appears,
and from eq. (5.65) we have
e

−iα


= 0|T



 +∞

exp −i





|0

.

(5.66)

"
!

0|T φI (x1 ) . . . φI (xn ) exp −i d4 x HI |0
"
!

=
,
0|T exp −i d4 x HI |0

(5.67)

−∞

dt HI (t )

−1

So we ﬁnally get our basic formula

0|T {φ(x1 ) . . . φ(xn )}|0

120 Perturbation theory and Feynman diagrams

∞

where we have written −∞ dt HI = d4 x HI . The left-hand side of
eq. (5.67) is the Green’s function which enters in the LSZ formula, and
the right-hand side shows how we can compute it in terms of the free ﬁeld
φI . Observe furthermore that HI is expressed very simply in terms of φI ,
since the functional dependence of HI on φI is exactly the same as the
functional dependence of Hint on φ. To understand this point, consider
for instance a scalar ﬁeld theory with the quartic self-interaction, Hint =
(λ/4!)φ4 . Then, using eqs. (5.53) and (5.47),


λ 4 −iH0 (t−t0 )
iH0 (t−t0 )
HI (t) = e
φ e
4!
λ  iH0 (t−t0 ) −iH0 (t−t0 )   iH0 (t−t0 ) −iH0 (t−t0 ) 
e
e
=
φe
φe
4! 


× eiH0 (t−t0 ) φ e−iH0 (t−t0 ) eiH0 (t−t0 ) φ e−iH0 (t−t0 )
=

λ 4
φ .
4! I

(5.68)

At this point the perturbative strategy is clear. We expand the exponential in eq. (5.67) in powers of HI , and we are left with the task of
computing time-ordered products of free ﬁelds. In principle, it is clear
that these can be written in terms of creation and annihilation operators, and therefore we know how to compute them. Such a brute force
computation, however, would quickly become too cumbersome, and in
the following we will study a technique, based on Wick’s theorem and
Feynman graphs, which makes these computations feasible. In the next
section we will start from the simplest case, the T -product of two ﬁelds.

5.4

The Feynman propagator

We want to compute the Feynman propagator, deﬁned as
0|T {φI (x)φI (y)}|0 .

(5.69)

When we study perturbation theory we always use the interaction picture ﬁeld φI . The original ﬁeld φ which evolves with the full Hamiltonian
will never appear again. Therefore, to make the notation simpler, from
now on we will denote the interaction picture ﬁeld simply by φ, omitting
the subscript “I”.
We ﬁrst separate φ into its creation and annihilation parts,
φ(x) = φ+ (x) + φ− (x) ,

(5.70)

where


d3 p

ap e−ipx ,
(2π)3 2Ep

d3 p
−

φ (x) =
a†p e+ipx .
(2π)3 2Ep
+

φ (x) =

(5.71)
(5.72)

5.4

The Feynman propagator 121

Of course φ+ (x)|0 = 0 and 0|φ− (x) = 0. Consider ﬁrst the case
x0 > y 0 . Then
T {φ(x)φ(y)} = φ+ (x)φ+ (y) + φ+ (x)φ− (y) + φ− (x)φ+ (y)
+φ− (x)φ− (y)
= φ+ (x)φ+ (y) + φ− (y)φ+ (x) + φ− (x)φ+ (y)
+φ− (x)φ− (y) + [φ+ (x), φ− (y)]
= : φ(x)φ(y) : + [φ+ (x), φ− (y)] ,

(5.73)

where as usual the colons denote normal ordering. Similarly for y 0 > x0
we get T {φ(x)φ(y)} = : φ(x)φ(y) : +[φ+ (y), φ− (x)]. Therefore
T {φ(x)φ(y)} = : φ(x)φ(y) : + D(x − y) ,

(5.74)

where
D(x − y) = θ(x0 − y 0 )[φ+ (x), φ− (y)] + θ(y 0 − x0 )[φ+ (y), φ− (x)] . (5.75)
Now observe that the expectation value of the normal ordered term
: φ(x)φ(y) : is zero, because there is always either one annihilation operator acting on |0 or a creation operator acting on 0|. Instead the
commutator of ap and a†p is a c-number, so also D(x − y) is a c-number,
and 0|D(x − y)|0 = D(x − y)0|0 = D(x − y). Therefore D(x − y) is
just the Feynman propagator,
0|T {φ(x)φ(y)}|0 = D(x − y) .

(5.76)

Computing the commutators we ﬁnd


d3 p 1  0
0 −ip(x−y)
0
0 ip(x−y)
θ(x
.
−
y
)e
+
θ(y
−
x
)e
D(x − y) =
(2π)3 2Ep
(5.77)
The integral over d3 p can be computed explicitly, but it is more useful
to rewrite (5.77) as a four-dimensional integral,

D(x − y) =

i
d4 p
e−ip(x−y) ,
(2π)4 p2 − m2 + i

p0

(5.78)

where  → 0+ . To prove the equivalence of eqs. (5.77) and (5.78), observe
that the integral in eq. (5.78) can be written as


0
0
0
d3 p ip·(x−y) +∞ dp0
i
e−ip (x −y ) ,
e
(5.79)
0 )2 − E 2 + i
(2π)3
2π
(p
−∞
p
where Ep = +(p2 + m2 )1/2 . The integral over p0 can be computed
going in the complex p0 -plane. The i factor displaces slightly the poles
from the real axis. The poles are at ±p0  Ep (1 − i/(2Ep2 )). Thus the
pole at p0 = Ep is slightly displaced below the real axis and the pole at
p0 = −Ep is slightly displaced above the real axis, as shown in Fig. 5.1.

Fig. 5.1 The position of the poles in

the complex p0 -plane.

122 Perturbation theory and Feynman diagrams

For x0 −y 0 > 0 we can close the contour in the lower half-plane and we
only get the contribution of the pole at p0 = Ep . The pole is encircled
clockwise, so it gives
e−iEp (x −y )
i
1 −iEp (x0 −y0 )
(−2πi)
=+
e
.
2π
2Ep
2Ep
0

0

(5.80)

If instead x0 − y 0 < 0 we can close the contour in the upper half-plane
and we only get the contribution of the pole at p0 = −Ep , which now is
encircled counterclockwise, so it gives
eiEp (x −y )
i
1 iEp (x0 −y0 )
(2πi)
=+
e
.
2π
−2Ep
2Ep
0

0

(5.81)

In both cases, we have reproduced eq. (5.77) (in the second term we
must also rename the integration variable p → −p).
From eq. (5.78) we read oﬀ the Feynman propagator in momentum
space,
i
D̃(p) = 2
.
(5.82)
p − m2 + i
It is also easy to see that the Feynman propagator is just a Green’s
function of the operator 2 + m2 . In fact, from eq. (5.78),

i
d4 p
2
(−p2 + m2 )e−ip(x−y)
(2x + m )D(x − y) =
(2π)4 p2 − m2 + i
= −iδ (4) (x − y) .
(5.83)
Observe that this result holds independently of the prescription for going
around the poles. There are in principle four diﬀerent prescriptions (each
of the two poles can be slightly displaced above or below the real axis)
and diﬀerent Green’s functions are obtained with diﬀerent prescriptions,
and obey diﬀerent boundary conditions (see Exercise 5.1).

5.5

Wick’s theorem and Feynman
diagrams

Wick’s theorem is a very useful tool for reducing the expectation value
of a generic T -product of ﬁelds
0|T {φ(x1 ) . . . φ(xn )}|0

(5.84)

to a combination of Feynman propagators. It generalizes the identity
(5.74) to an n-point function, and states that T {φ(x1 ) . . . φ(xn )} is equal
to the normal ordered product : φ(x1 ) . . . φ(xn ) : plus all possible combinations of normal ordering and contractions of ﬁelds, where a contraction
of two ﬁelds φ(x1 ), φ(x2 ) is deﬁned to be equal to the Feynman propagator D(x1 − x2 ). For instance (using the notation φ(xi ) = φi and

5.5

Wick’s theorem and Feynman diagrams 123

D(xi − xj ) = Dij ),
T {φ1 φ2 φ3 φ4 } = : φ1 φ2 φ3 φ4 : +D12 : φ3 φ4 : +D13 : φ2 φ4 :
+D14 : φ2 φ3 : +D23 : φ1 φ4 : +D24 : φ1 φ3 :

(5.85)

+D34 : φ1 φ2 : +D12 D34 + D13 D24 + D14 D23 .
The proof of the theorem can be given by induction on the number
of ﬁelds, see, e.g. Peskin and Schroeder (1995), pages 88–90. When
we take the vacuum expectation value, all terms with a normal ordering
factor give zero, and only the terms where all ﬁelds have been contracted
survive. Thus in our example
0|T {φ1 φ2 φ3 φ4 }|0 = D12 D34 + D13 D24 + D14 D23 .

(5.86)

The above equation has a vivid physical interpretation. If we interpret
D(x1 − x2 ) as the amplitude for the propagation of a particle from the
space-time point x1 to x2 , then D(x1 − x2 )D(x3 − x4 ) is the amplitude
for the process in which one particle goes from x1 to x2 and another from
x3 to x4 , without interacting with each other. We can now associate a
Feynman graph in position space to each non-vanishing contribution.
We simply draw a line connecting points xi and xj for each propagator
D(xi − xj ). For instance, the term D(x1 − x2 )D(x3 − x4 ) can be associated to the (rather trivial) Feynman diagram in position space given
in Fig. 5.2.
When we expand the exponential in eq. (5.67) in powers of HI , each
term HI contains ﬁelds at the same space-time point. As we will see
explicitly below, this gives rise to less trivial Feynman graphs.
The best way to understand all this machinery is to put it to work,
and to start computing. Therefore, in the next two subsections, we
will perform a few computations in all details. The important point
that will emerge, however, is that it is not necessary every time to go
through the rather involved steps that we will present, since the results
can be summarized very compactly by a set of rules, the Feynman rules,
that allow us to associate to each amplitude a set of Feynman diagrams,
and to write down almost immediately the contribution of each Feynman
diagram. Still, once in a lifetime, it might be useful to go through all the
detailed steps, before starting to use the Feynman rules as an automatic
machinery. The reader who does not wish to follow the computations
in all details can go quickly through the next two subsections and ﬁnd
a summary of Feynman rules in Section 5.5.3.

5.5.1

A few very explicit computations

We begin with the scattering amplitude for a process with two initial particles
with momenta k1 , k2 into two ﬁnal particles with momenta p1 , p2 , in the
theory with HI = (λ/4!)φ4 . The general formulas (5.46, 5.67) give
! 2
!
√
√
2
Y
Y i Z
i Z
p1 p2 |iT |k1 k2 
p2 − m2
k 2 − m2
i=1 i
j=1 j

x1

x2

x3

x4

Fig. 5.2 The diagrammatic repre-

sentation of D(x1 − x2 )D(x3 − x4 ).

124 Perturbation theory and Feynman diagrams
Z

=

d4 x1 d4 x2 d4 x3 d4 x4 ei(p1 x1 +p2 x2 −k1 x3 −k2 x4 )
ˆ λ R 4 4˜
0|T {φ(x1 )φ(x2 )φ(x3 )φ(x4 ) exp −i 4!
d xφ }|0
ˆ
R
˜
×
.
λ
0|T {exp −i 4!
d4 xφ4 }|0

(5.87)

We work at the lowest non-trivial order in perturbation theory in λ. As we
will see later, in λφ4 theory Z = 1 + O(λ2 ) and therefore, since we will work
up to O(λ), we set Z = 1.
Zero-order term: First of all there is a term of order λ0 , which is given
simply setting λ = 0 in eq. (5.87). Of course, if there is no coupling, there
is no scattering, and we must ﬁnd a trivial amplitude at this order. Let us
nevertheless check explicitly how this comes out. At λ = 0, using eq. (5.86),
Z Y
4

d4 xi ei(p1 x1 +p2 x2 −k1 x3 −k2 x4 ) 0|T {φ(x1 )φ(x2 )φ(x3 )φ(x4 )}|0

i=1

=

Z Y
4

d4 xi ei(p1 x1 +p2 x2 −k1 x3 −k2 x4 ) (D(x1 − x2 )D(x3 − x4 ) + . . .) ,

i=1

(5.88)
where the dots represent the other two terms in eq. (5.86). In terms of Feynman graphs in position space, the contribution written explicitly is shown in
Fig. 5.2 and represents a particle traveling from x1 to x2 and a second particle
traveling from x3 to x4 , without interacting with the ﬁrst (and similarly for
the other two terms denoted by the dots in eq. (5.88)). Changing integration
variables to x = x1 − x2 and X = (x1 + x2 )/2 and similarly for x3 , x4 we have
Z
d4 x1 d4 x2 d4 x3 d4 x4 ei(p1 x1 +p2 x2 −k1 x3 −k2 x4 ) D(x1 − x2 )D(x3 − x4 )
»Z
–
d4 xd4 Xei(p1 +p2 )X+i(p1 −p2 )x/2 D(x)
=
»Z
–
×
d4 xd4 Xe−i(k1 +k2 )X−i(k1 −k2 )x/2 D(x)
= (2π)4 δ (4) (p1 + p2 )(2π)4 δ (4) (k1 + k2 )

6

Observe that the factor i in p2 −m2 +
i should be kept when p is an integration variable, because in this case it
gives the prescription for going around
the poles, but if p is the momentum on
an external leg, and is therefore ﬁxed,
we can set directly = 0.
7

There is a subtlety here connected
with graphs known as tadpoles, that
we will introduce below. In principle
inserting tadpole graphs in the lines of
a disconnected diagram we can obtain
the appropriate number of pole factors.
However, the tadpoles are simply reabsorbed in the mass renormalization, as
we will see in Section 5.6.

i
i
.
p21 − m2 k12 − m2

(5.89)

Comparing with eq. (5.87) we see that on the right-hand side we have obtained only two pole factors,6 which originated from the two propagators in
momentum space, while on the left-hand side of eq. (5.87) there are four pole
factors. Therefore only two of them cancel, and we get a contribution to the
T -matrix element
p1 p2 |iT |k1 k2  = −(2π)8 (p22 − m2 )(k22 − m2 )δ (4) (p1 + p2 )δ (4) (k1 + k2 ) (5.90)
and when we go on mass shell this gives zero. The same happens for the other
contributions indicated by the dots in eq. (5.88). Therefore at zero order in λ
there is no contribution to the scattering amplitude, as expected.
This is a general situation which repeats for the n → m scattering amplitudes, and disconnected graphs do not contribute, simply because the Feynman graphs do not provide enough pole factors to cancel those that appear in
the LSZ formula.7
Term O(λ): The ﬁrst non-trivial contribution comes expanding the exponential in eq. (5.87) to ﬁrst order in λ. Let us for the moment neglect the

5.5
denominator in eq. (5.87). Then at this order we have
! 2
!
2
Y
Y
i
i
p1 p2 |iT |k1 k2 
p2 − m2
k 2 − m2
j=1 j
i=1 i
Z
= d4 x1 d4 x2 d4 x3 d4 x4 exp{i(p1 x1 + p2 x2 − k1 x3 − k2 x4 )}
«Z
„
λ
d4 x 0|T {φ(x1 )φ(x2 )φ(x3 )φ(x4 )φ4 (x)}|0 .
× −i
4!

Wick’s theorem and Feynman diagrams 125

(5.91)

As before, the disconnected graphs are unable to cancel all pole factors and
therefore, when we go on mass shell, they give zero. The only connected
Feynman graphs are obtained contracting each of the four φ(xi ) with one of
the four φ(x); there are 4! possible contractions of this type, and therefore the
right-hand side of eq. (5.91) is equal to
Z
d4 x d4 x1 d4 x2 d4 x3 d4 x4 exp{i(p1 x1 + p2 x2 − k1 x3 − k2 x4 )}
×(−iλ)D(x1 − x)D(x2 − x)D(x3 − x)D(x4 − x) .

(5.92)

We can represent it with the Feynman graph shown in Fig. 5.3. Setting yi =
xi − x and performing ﬁrst the integration over the yi we get
Z
(−iλ)D̃(p1 )D̃(p2 )D̃(k1 )D̃(k2 ) d4 x ei(p1 +p2 −k1 −k2 )x
(5.93)
!
!
2
2
Y
Y
i
i
.
= (−iλ)(2π)4 δ (4) (p1 + p2 − k1 − k2 )
2
2
2
p
−
m
k
−
m2
i
j
j=1
i=1
Therefore
p1 p2 |iT |k1 k2  = (−iλ)(2π)4 δ (4) (p1 + p2 − k1 − k2 ) .

(5.94)

We note several aspects which can be generalized to all Feynman graphs:
• Only connected graphs contribute.
• For connected graphs, the propagators associated to the external legs
cancel exactly the pole factors in the LSZ formula.
• Each interaction vertex gives a factor −iλ.
• There is an integration over a variable x which gives the overall energy–
momentum conservation.
Finally, we have to consider the eﬀect of the denominator in eq. (5.87). The
denominator gives only vacuum-to-vacuum graphs, i.e. Feynman diagrams
with no external lines. However each contribution from the numerator can be
“dressed” with all possible vacuum-to-vacuum graphs, considering all possible
disconnected graph made with the original graph plus all possible vacuumto-vacuum graphs. This is shown in the ﬁrst line of Fig. 5.4, where we give
examples of disconnected graphs with four external legs. As shown graphically
in the second line of the ﬁgure, the connected graph with four external legs
factorizes, and the term in the parentheses is the sum of all vacuum-to-vacuum
graphs. This is nothing but the perturbative expansion of the denominator,
so the term in parentheses exactly cancels the denominator. This means that
we can simply set the vacuum expectation value at the denominator to one,
if at the same time we neglect in the numerator all disconnected diagrams in
which a disconnected component is a vacuum diagram.

x1

x3

x

x2

x4

Fig. 5.3 The Feynman diagram in

position space representing the 2 →
2 scattering amplitude at O(λ).

126 Perturbation theory and Feynman diagrams

=

+

+

+

+

* ( 1+

+

+

+

... =

... )

Fig. 5.4 A diagrammatic representation of the eﬀect of vacuum-to-vacuum

graphs.

x3

x1
x

y

x2

x4

Fig. 5.5 The Feynman graph in po-

sition space corresponding to the
contraction described in the text.











x1

x3






x
y

x2


x4

The Feynman graphs that we have considered until now have no internal
lines. To illustrate what happens with internal lines it is simpler to consider
a theory with HI = (λ/3!)φ3 . In this case three lines instead of four meet at
each vertex. To compute the 2 → 2 scattering amplitude we consider
Z
d4 x1 d4 x2 d4 x3 d4 x4 exp{i(p1 x1 + p2 x2 − k1 x3 − k2 x4 )}
»
–
Z
λ
d4 x φ3 (x) }|0c . (5.95)
× 0|T {φ(x1 )φ(x2 )φ(x3 )φ(x4 ) exp −i
3!
We have seen that the denominator in eq. (5.67) is canceled by disconnected
graphs in which a disconnected component is a vacuum-to-vacuum graph,
while disconnected graphs with external legs in more than one disconnected
component do not contribute because they do not provide the right pole factors. We therefore omit the vacuum-to-vacuum amplitude in the denominator
hereafter, and we add a subscript 0| . . . |0c to remind us that we must consider only connected graphs.
In this theory at O(λ) there is no contribution to the four-point amplitude,
because expanding the exponential to ﬁrst order in λ we get the Green’s
function 0|T {φ(x1 )φ(x2 )φ(x3 )φ(x4 )φ3 (x)}|0, which has an odd number of
ﬁelds, so we cannot contract all of them and the vacuum expectation value is
zero. Therefore the leading term is O(λ2 ), and is
Z
(5.96)
d4 x1 d4 x2 d4 x3 d4 x4 exp{i(p1 x1 + p2 x2 − k1 x3 − k2 x4 )}
„
«2 Z
Z
λ
1
−i
×
d4 x d4 y 0|T {φ(x1 )φ(x2 )φ(x3 )φ(x4 )φ3 (x)φ3 (y)}|0c .
2!
3!









Fig. 5.6 A Feynman graph corre-

sponding to a diﬀerent set of contractions.

The new aspect here is that, in order to contract all ﬁelds and to obtain a
connected diagram, we must contract one ﬁeld φ(x) with one φ(y), where
x, y are the positions of the two vertices. We therefore have graphs with two
vertices connected by an internal line, while in the previous example all lines
were external, i.e. related to the initial or ﬁnal particles. To understand how
to treat these graphs we consider the case in which we contract φ(x1 ) and
φ(x2 ) each with one of the φ(x), φ(x3 ) and φ(x4 ) each with one of the φ(y),
and the remaining φ(x) with the remaining φ(y), as in Fig. 5.5. (With diﬀerent
contractions, we can also obtain the graph in Fig. 5.6, and an analogous graph
with x3 and x4 interchanged.) Taking into account the combinatorial factor,
the factor 1/2! from the expansion of the exponential, and the fact that there
is an equal contribution with x and y interchanged, the graph in Fig. 5.5 gives
Z
(5.97)
d4 x1 d4 x2 d4 x3 d4 x4 exp{i(p1 x1 + p2 x2 − k1 x3 − k2 x4 )}

5.5

Wick’s theorem and Feynman diagrams 127

Z

Z

d4 y(−iλ)2 D(x1 − x)D(x2 − x)D(x − y)D(y − x3 )D(y − x4 )
Z
Z
= (−iλ)2 D̃(p1 )D̃(p2 )D̃(k1 )D̃(k2 ) d4 x d4 y ei(p1 +p2 )x−i(k1 +k2 )y D(x − y)
×

d4 x

= (−iλ)2 (2π)4 δ (4) (p1 + p2 − k1 − k2 )D̃(p1 )D̃(p2 )D̃(p1 + p2 )D̃(k1 )D̃(k2 ) .
Again we ﬁnd the momentum space propagators associated to the external
legs, which are canceled by the pole terms in the LSZ formula, and the energy–
momentum conservation. The new factor is D̃(p1 + p2 ), associated to the
internal line.
It now becomes clear that it is more convenient to work in momentum space,
rather than in position space. Then to each line of a graph is associated the
momentum space propagator given in eq. (5.82). The external lines give factors
which cancel the pole terms in the LSZ formula. The Feynman diagrams in
momentum space corresponding to Figs. 5.3 and 5.5 are shown in Figs. 5.7
and 5.8.
At this point it is not diﬃcult to see how to compute the most general
amplitude associated with tree graphs (a tree graph is a graph with internal
and external lines, but with no closed internal loop). The technique can be
summarized by the Feynman rules in momentum space, for a scalar ﬁeld theory
(some generalization will be needed for fermions, gauge ﬁelds, etc., and will
be discussed later):
• Draw all connected graphs corresponding to the given initial and ﬁnal
states. The number of lines that meet at each vertex is determined by
the interaction term; e.g. three lines in φ3 theory and four lines in φ4
theory. Disconnected graphs do not contribute.
• To each external leg is associated a factor which compensates the pole
factor in the LSZ reduction formula, eq. (5.46). Therefore we can simply
omit all these factors from the graph, and we will obtain directly the
matrix element of iT . This is often expressed saying that we consider
the graphs “with external legs amputated”.
• There is an overall Dirac delta imposing energy–momentum conservation. In order not to write explicitly the Dirac delta each time we
compute a Feynman graph, it is convenient to deﬁne a matrix element
Mf i from
!
X
X
4 (4)
pi −
kj iMf i . (5.98)
p1 . . . pn |iT |k1 . . . km  = (2π) δ
i

j

The labels i, f refer to the initial and ﬁnal states or more explicitly, for
a scalar theory, Mf i = M(p1 , . . . , pn ; k1 , . . . , km ) (more generally, the
initial and ﬁnal states are labeled also by the spin states of the initial
and ﬁnal particles).
• Energy–momentum conservation must be imposed separately at each
vertex. Note for instance that in the internal line in Fig. 5.8 we had two
external momenta p1 and p2 ﬂowing into a vertex, and the momentum
associated to the internal line ﬂowing out of this vertex is p1 + p2 .
The “virtual particle” associated with this internal line decays in the
ﬁnal states with momenta k1 , k2 , and the overall Dirac delta ensures
p1 + p2 = k1 + k2 , so momentum is conserved also at the other vertex.
• To each vertex associate a factor −i times the coupling constant.

p1

k1

p

k2

2

Fig. 5.7 The graph in momentum

space corresponding to Fig. 5.3.

p1

p2

p1 + p2

k1

k2

Fig. 5.8 The graph in momentum

space corresponding to Fig. 5.5.

128 Perturbation theory and Feynman diagrams
• To each internal line associate a propagator, with the value of the fourmomentum given by energy–momentum conservation.
• There is a combinatorial factor which combines the number of equivalent
contractions, the factors 1/n! from the expansion of the exponential
at order n, and numerical factors associated to the deﬁnition of the
coupling constant, such as the factors 1/4! in (λ/4!)φ4 .
In the next subsection we will understand what happens when there are
internal loops in a graph.

5.5.2

k
p

k1

1

p2

k2

p1 + p2 _ k

p

k1

1

k1+ k _ p1

k

p2

k2

p1

k2

k 2 + k _ p1

k

p2

We have by now understood how to write a Feynman graph when there
are internal lines whose momentum is ﬁxed by energy–momentum conservation at a vertex. Consider however the O(λ2 ) corrections to the
2 → 2 scattering amplitude in λφ4 . The possible connected graphs that
can be constructed with four external legs (since we study a 2 → 2 amplitude), four lines meeting at each vertex (since we are in φ4 theory)
and two vertices (since we want to study the terms O(λ2 )) are given in
Fig. 5.9. The three graphs correspond to diﬀerent types of contractions,
which we will discuss in more detail below. The important new point
is that the momenta of the internal lines are not completely ﬁxed imposing energy–momentum conservation at each vertex. We can assign
an arbitrary momentum k to one internal line and the other has a momentum ﬁxed by energy–momentum conservation at each vertex. The
fact that not all momenta are ﬁxed takes place each time we have loops
in a Feynman graph. We must therefore understand how to treat these
graphs. Again, we discuss some examples in full detail.
Let us work out the 2 → 2 amplitude in λφ4 at one loop order. We
start as usual from

d4 x1 d4 x2 d4 x3 d4 x4 exp{i(p1 x1 + p2 x2 − k1 x3 − k2 x4 )}


λ
×0|T {φ(x1 )φ(x2 )φ(x3 )φ(x4 ) exp −i
d4 xφ4 }|0 c . (5.99)
4!

k1

Fig. 5.9 The three contributions to

the one-loop 2 → 2 amplitude in
momentum space.
x1
x3
x
x2

Loops and divergences

The term of order λ2 is

1
(5.100)
d4 x1 d4 x2 d4 x3 d4 x4 exp{i(p1 x1 + p2 x2 − k1 x3 − k2 x4 )}
2!

2 

λ
× −i
d4 x d4 y0|T {φ(x1 )φ(x2 )φ(x3 )φ(x4 )φ4 (x)φ4 (y)}|0 c .
4!

y
x4

Fig. 5.10 A contribution to the one-

loop amplitude in position space.

The Feynman graph in position space shown in Fig. 5.10 is obtained
contracting φ(x1 ) with one of the φ(x), φ(x2 ) with another φ(x) (there
are 4 · 3 possible ways to do it), φ(x3 ) with one φ(y), φ(x4 ) with another
of the φ(y) (again 4 · 3 combinations), and the remaining two of the φ(x)
with the remaining two φ(y) (there are 2 possible ways to do it). An
equal contribution is obtained exchanging x ↔ y, i.e. contracting φ(x1 )

5.5

Wick’s theorem and Feynman diagrams 129

and φ(x2 ) with two of the φ(y) and φ(x3 ), φ(x4 ) with two of the φ(x);
this gives an additional factor of 2, so we ﬁnally get

1
2
(−iλ)
d4 x1 d4 x2 d4 x3 d4 x4 d4 x d4 y ei(p1 x1 +p2 x2 −k1 x3 −k2 x4 )
2
×D(x1 − x)D(x2 − x)D(x − y)D(x − y)D(y − x3 )D(y − x4 )
1
= (−iλ)2 D̃(p1 )D̃(p2 )D̃(k1 )D̃(k2 )
2
×

d4 x d4 y ei(p1 +p2 )x−i(k1 +k2 )y D2 (x − y)

1
= (−iλ)2 D̃(p1 )D̃(p2 )D̃(k1 )D̃(k2 )(2π)4 δ (4) (p1 + p2 − k1 − k2 )
2
d4 k
D̃(k)D̃(p1 + p2 − k) .
(5.101)
×
(2π)4
Similar expressions are obtained if x1 and x3 are joined to x while x2
and x4 to y, and if x1 and x4 are joined to x while x2 and x3 to y.
These three possibilities in position space give rise to the three graphs
of Fig. 5.9 in momentum space. In eq. (5.101) we recognize the usual
factors associated to the external legs and the overall energy–momentum
conservation. The new aspect here is the integration over the momentum
k of the internal line which was not ﬁxed by the energy–momentum
conservation at the vertices.
We can therefore add to our list of Feynman rules in momentum space:
• associate a propagator to each internal line in a loop, use momentum conservation at the vertices to reduce the number of independent momenta, and integrate over the remaining unﬁxed momenta,
with the measure d4 k/(2π)4 .
We deﬁne
(−iλ)2
A(p) ≡
2



i
i
d4 k
.
(2π)4 k 2 − m2 + i (p − k)2 − m2 + i

(5.102)

The 2 → 2 scattering amplitude at one loop level is then
iM2→2 = −iλ + A(p1 + p2 ) + A(p1 − k1 ) + A(p1 − k2 ) ,

(5.103)

where the three contributions correspond to the three ways in which the
process can take place, shown in Fig. 5.9.
Now however we discover that Feynman diagrams containing loops
can be divergent! Indeed, the integral in eq. (5.102) diverges at large
k, and is an example of an ultraviolet (UV) divergence. To study this
integral we proceed as follows. First of all, we will limit for simplicity
to the calculation of A(p) when p = 0.8 Recall that the i prescription
means that, in the complex k 0 -plane, the pole at k 0 > 0 is below the real
axis and the pole at k 0 < 0 is above the real axis, see Fig. 5.1. Therefore
we can change the integration path in the complex k 0 plane, rotating
counterclockwise from the real axis to the imaginary axis.

8

For this graph, this is suﬃcient for
extracting the divergent part, because
the divergence comes from the region
k → ∞, where (p−k)2 → k 2 , and there
are no subleading divergencies.

130 Perturbation theory and Feynman diagrams

This is called the Wick rotation. The integration variable is the com0
plex variable k 0 ; on the real axis we write dk 0 = dkM
while on the imagi0
0
0
0
nary axis we write dk = idkE , where kM and kE are real variables, and
the subscript denotes Minkowskian and Euclidean space, respectively.
Then we obtain

d4 k
1
λ2
A(0) = i
.
(5.104)
2
(2π)4 (k 2 + m2 )2
9

To check the sign consider the complex z-plane, with z = x + iy; let C1
denote the real axis running from x =
−∞ toward x = +∞ and C2 the imaginary axis again oriented from y = −∞
to y = +∞; then, closing the contour
at inﬁnity in the
R ﬁrst and third quadrants, we have C −C dz = 0 so that
R
R
R
1
2 R
= C dz. But C dz = dx
C1 dz
R
2 R
1
and C dz = i dy.

0 2
) + k2 . The overall factor
Here k is a Euclidean momentum, k 2 = (kE
9
of i comes from the rotation.
For our purposes the exact computation of the integral is not necessary. The important point is that the integral diverges in the UV.
We introduce a cutoﬀ Λ stating that we integrate only over Euclidean
momenta with k 2 < Λ2 , and we extract the divergent part:


λ2
d4 k 1
+ ﬁnite parts
2
(2π)4 k 4
 Λ
λ2 1
dk
2
+ ﬁnite parts
=i
(2π
)
2 (2π)4
k
1
= iλ2
log Λ + ﬁnite parts .
16π 2

A(0) = i

2

(5.105)

The factor 2π 2 is the solid angle in four dimensions. At p ﬁnite the
calculation is more complicated, and depending on the value of p one
can have poles also in the ﬁrst and third quadrant. In general, when one
has to perform more complicated computations, it is not convenient to
use as regularization a cutoﬀ over Euclidean momenta; there are techniques, in particular dimensional regularization, which are much more
convenient (see Chapter 7). In any case, in this graph the divergent part
is independent of p and the p dependence only enters in the ﬁnite parts.
Since the divergence is independent of p, the three graphs in Fig. 5.9
give the same contribution to the divergence. As a result, at one-loop,
the 2 → 2 scattering amplitude in λφ4 is
iM2→2 = −iλ + iλ2 (β0 log Λ + ﬁnite parts) ,

(5.106)

with
β0 =

k
p

p

Fig. 5.11 A tadpole graph.

3
.
16π 2

(5.107)

The sign of β0 plays a very important role and will be discussed in detail
in Section 5.9.
These divergences are typical of loop graphs. In the next section
we will understand how they can be cured. First however we discuss
another example of divergence, considering the two-point function in
λφ4 theory. In momentum space, at zero order in λ, this is just the
Feynman propagator D̃(p). At order λ we have the graph shown in
Fig. 5.11. This graph is known as a tadpole graph.

5.5

Wick’s theorem and Feynman diagrams 131

Using the Feynman rules in momentum space and performing the
Wick rotation k 0 → ik 0 , this is given by



−iλ
d4 k
1
λ
Λ 2 + m2
2
2
−iB ≡
= −i
Λ − m log
,
2
(2π)4 k 2 + m2
32π 2
m2
(5.108)
so this term has a quadratic and a logarithmic divergence, both coming
from the large k integration region, so they are again UV divergences.
Observe also that the tadpole graph (with external legs amputated)
is independent of the external momentum p. Actually, one can even
resum the whole class of graphs shown in Fig. 5.12. Including also the
propagators from the external legs, the result for the two-point function
in momentum space is
D̃(p) + D̃(p)(−iB)D̃(p) + D̃(p)(−iB)D̃(p)(−iB)D̃(p) + . . .


= D̃(p) 1 + (−iB D̃(p)) + (−iB D̃(p))2 + . . .
(5.109)

i
1
i
1
= 2
.
= 2
= D̃(p)
B
2
2−B
p
−
m
p
−
m
1
−
1 + iB D̃(p)
p2 −m2
We see that the net eﬀect is to shift the mass from m2 to m2 +B. We will
make use of this fact when we study the renormalization of the theory.
At O(λ2 ) there are further contributions to the two-point function. One
possible graph is shown in Fig. 5.13. Iterating graphs of this type we
obtain again a geometric series, see Fig. 5.14, so again the result goes in
the denominator.
The Feynman graph in Fig. 5.13 gives
 4
λ2
1
d k1 d4 k2
i
. (5.110)
4
4
2
2
6
(2π) (2π) [(p − k1 − k2 ) − m ](k12 − m2 )(k22 − m2 )
The integral is somewhat more diﬃcult to compute, compared to the
previous examples, and the result turns out to be proportional to


Λ2
λ2 p2 log 2 + C ,
(5.111)
p
so in this case the divergence depends on p2 . After resumming the
geometrical series, the result for the two-point function in momentum
space becomes of the form
i
A(Λ, p2 )p2 − m2 − B(Λ)

(5.112)

2

with A(Λ, p2 ) = 1 + λ2 (c1 log Λp2 + c2 ), and c1 , c2 some constants.

5.5.3

Summary of Feynman rules for a scalar ﬁeld

It is now clear that it is not necessary to go each time explicitly through
the process of developing the exponential of the interaction Hamiltonian

+

+

+

+ ...

Fig. 5.12 The resummation of tad-

pole graphs.

k1
p

k2

p

k1 + k 2 _ p
Fig. 5.13 A two-loop correction to

the propagator.

+

+

+

+...

Fig. 5.14 The resummation of the
graph shown in Fig. 5.13.

132 Perturbation theory and Feynman diagrams

to the desired order and performing the contractions using the Wick
theorem, since the result can always be summarized by a simple set of
rules. First of all, we have seen that it is usually more convenient to
work in momentum space, and we summarize here the Feynman rules in
momentum space. We consider for deﬁniteness a real scalar ﬁeld with
an interaction term
λ
(5.113)
Hint = φn .
n!
The ﬁrst step is to draw all connected graphs corresponding to the given
initial and ﬁnal states, with n lines meeting at each vertex. For each
graph proceed as follows:
• Neglect the external legs.
• Energy–momentum conservation must be imposed separately at
each vertex.
• To each vertex associate a factor −iλ.
• To each internal line with momentum p associate a propagator
D̃(p) =

i
.
p2 − m2 + i

(5.114)

• Integrate over the four-momenta ki which are not ﬁxed by energy–
momentum conservation at each vertex, with a measure d4 ki /(2π)4 .
• Include the appropriate combinatorial factor, which combines a
factor 1/N ! from the expansion of the exponential at order N , the
number of equivalent contractions, and the factor 1/n! from the
normalization of the coupling in the theory with Hint = (λ/n!)φn .
The sum of the contributions of all Feynman diagrams gives iMf i .
This is related to the matrix element of the T operator by
⎛
⎞


p1 . . . pn |iT |k1 . . . km = (2π)4 δ (4) ⎝
pi −
kj ⎠ iMf i , (5.115)
j

i

and T is related to the S-matrix by S = 1 + iT .

5.5.4

Feynman rules for fermions and gauge bosons

We now want to understand the Feynman rules for more interesting
theories, like QED, which contains fermions and gauge bosons. The
derivation is conceptually similar to what we have seen for the scalar
ﬁelds. We will therefore just collect the relevant results, referring to
Peskin and Schroeder (1995), Sections 4.7 and 4.8 for the derivations.
The fermion propagator. Wick’s theorem can be generalized to
fermionic ﬁelds, if we deﬁne the T -product of two Dirac ﬁelds as
T {Ψ(x)Ψ̄(y)} =

Ψ(x)Ψ̄(y)
−Ψ̄(y)Ψ(x)

x0 > y 0
x0 < y 0 .

(5.116)

The Feynman propagator for the Dirac ﬁeld is
S(x − y) = 0|T {Ψ(x)Ψ̄(y)}|0 .

(5.117)

5.5

Wick’s theorem and Feynman diagrams 133

Observe that S(x − y) is a 4 × 4 matrix in the Dirac indices. It can be
computed explicitly expanding Ψ in creation and destruction operators
and using the anticommutation relations (4.34). The result is

d4 p
S̃(p)e−ip(x−y) ,
(5.118)
S(x − y) =
(2π)4
where the momentum space propagator is
S̃(p) =

i( p + m)
.
p2 − m2 + i

(5.119)

Observe that
( p − m)( p + m) = γ µ γ ν pµ pν − m2 = p2 − m2 ,

(5.120)

since pµ pν is symmetric under µ ↔ ν and therefore we can replace
γ µ γ ν → (1/2){γ µ , γ ν } = η µν . Then we can multiply by ( p − m) both
the numerator and the denominator in eq. (5.119) (where dividing by
( p − m) means to multiply by the 4 × 4 Dirac matrix ( p − m)−1 ) and
rewrite S̃(p) in the form
S̃(p) =

i
,
p − m

(5.121)

where the prescription for going around the poles is understood. An
alternative way to compute the fermion propagator is to observe that,
from the deﬁnition, S(x − y) is a Green’s function of the Dirac operator,
(i ∂ − m)S(x − y) = iδ (4) (x − y) .

(5.122)

It is then straightforward to check that eqs. (5.118) and (5.121) provide
a solution, and the prescription for going around the poles is the same
as in the scalar case, and corresponds to the Feynman propagator.
The photon propagator. By deﬁnition the photon propagator is
Dµν (x − y) = 0|T {Aµ (x)Aν (y)}|0 .

(5.123)

Using the covariant quantization of the gauge ﬁeld discussed in Section 4.3.2, the calculation is a simple generalization of the calculation
for the KG ﬁeld, with the only diﬀerence that now we have four diﬀerent
creation operators a†p,λ labeled by a Lorentz index λ = 0, . . . 3, and the
commutator is given by eq. (4.106). Then the propagator in momentum
space is simply
D̃µν (k) =

−i
ηµν .
k 2 + i

(5.124)

In other words, the spatial components Ai have the same propagator as
a massless scalar ﬁeld, while A0 has the “wrong” sign. A more general
form of the photon propagator will be given in Chapter 7.

134 Perturbation theory and Feynman diagrams

The interaction vertex. While the propagators are ﬁxed by the kinetic terms, i.e. by the free theory, the interaction vertices depend of
course on the speciﬁc theory that we are considering. In QED the interaction term in the Hamiltonian is eAµ Ψ̄γ µ Ψ. Let us recall from Section 4.2 that the expansion of the ﬁeld Ψ, Ψ̄ in terms of creation and
annihilation operators is (see eqs. (4.32) and (4.33))

 

d3 p

Ψ(x) =
ap,s us (p)e−ipx + b†p,s v s (p)e+ipx ,
3
(2π) 2Ep s=1,2
(5.125)

 

d3 p
s
−ipx
†
s
+ipx

Ψ̄(x) =
b
,
v̄
(p)e
+
a
ū
(p)e
p,s
p,s
(2π)3 2Ep s=1,2
(5.126)
where ap,s destroys an electron (in a spin state labeled by s), a†p,s creates an electron, bp,s destroys a positron and b†p,s creates a positron.
Therefore Ψ can destroy an electron or create a positron while Ψ̄ can
destroy a positron or create an electron. Similarly the gauge ﬁeld, in the
covariant quantization, has the expansion (4.104),
Fig. 5.15 The QED vertex:

the
solid lines represent the fermions
and the wavy line the photon.

Fig. 5.16 The same interaction vertex, describing e− γ → e− .

10

Observe that for the physical process
e+ e− → γ the matrix element Mf i is
non-vanishing, iMf i = ieγ µ but the
matrix element of iT is zero because
the Dirac delta in eq. (5.98) cannot be
satisﬁed, so the process is forbidden by
energy–momentum conservation. However, the vertex of Fig. 5.15 enters as
a building block in all other Feynman
diagrams of QED.



3 


d3 p
†
−ipx
∗
+ipx


,
(p,
λ)a
e
+

(p,
λ)a
e
µ
p,λ
µ
p,λ
(2π)3 2ωp λ=0
(5.127)
and can destroy or create a photon. Therefore in eAµ Ψ̄γ µ Ψ there are
all possible terms with two fermion lines and one photon line, which
conserve the electric charge: for instance, we can destroy an electron with
Ψ and create it back with Ψ̄ while at the same time emitting a photon,
corresponding to a vertex e− → e− γ; or we can absorb the photon,
corresponding to a vertex e− γ → e− ; or we can destroy an electron with
Ψ, destroy a positron with Ψ̄ and create a photon, e+ e− → γ, etc.
All these possibilities are summarized associating a factor

Aµ (x) =

−ieγ µ

(5.128)

to the interaction vertex of Fig. 5.15. As in the scalar ﬁeld theory,
the factor −i in eq. (5.128) comes from the fact that in the T -product
appears the exponential of −iHI . In Fig. 5.15 the solid line can represent
either an electron propagating in the direction of the arrow or a positron
propagating in the opposite direction. If we imagine that time runs from
left to right, then Fig. 5.15 actually describes the process e+ e− → γ,
while e− γ → e− will be drawn as in Fig. 5.16, etc.10
The interaction vertex is proportional to γ µ and therefore is a matrix
in the Dirac indices and carries a Lorentz index.
The external lines. In the case of the scalar ﬁeld, acting with the ﬁeld
operator φ on the vacuum to create a particle brings a factor eipx while
destroying a particle brings a factor e−ipx , see eqs. (4.21) and (4.22).
This is the origin of the factors eipi xi for each ﬁnal particle and e−ikj yj

5.6

for each initial particle in the LSZ formula (5.46). From eqs. (5.125),
(5.126) and (5.127) we see that for fermions and gauge bosons, together
with the exponential factors (which, as we have seen, combine to give
an overall energy–momentum conservation and transform the position
space propagators into momentum space propagators) there are further
factors associated to the external legs. Namely
• A factor ∗µ (k) for each ﬁnal photon with momentum k and polarization given by µ (k).
• A factor µ (k) for each initial photon with momentum k and polarization given by µ (k).
• A factor us (p) for each initial electron with momentum p and spin
state s.
• A factor v s (p) for each ﬁnal positron with momentum p and spin
state s.
• A factor ūs (p) for each ﬁnal electron with momentum p and spin
state s.
• A factor v̄ s (p) for each initial positron with momentum p and spin
state s.
In other words, to each initial particle is associated its wave function,
and to each ﬁnal particle is associated the complex conjugate of the wave
function (or the Dirac adjoint, for Dirac spinors). For an elementary
scalar ﬁeld the wave function is just the plane wave e−ipx while for
particles with spin there is also the spin wave function, e.g. µ (k) for a
photon or us (p) for an electron.
Closed fermionic loops. Finally, from the anticommuting nature of
fermionic ﬁelds, it follows that for each closed fermionic loop there is an
additional minus sign.

5.6

Renormalization

The basic idea of renormalization is the following. We have seen that
some diagrams give divergent contributions. The ﬁrst step is therefore
to regularize the theory. For instance, we can put a cutoﬀ Λ over the
modulus of the Euclidean momenta, as we have done above (for technical
reasons, especially in gauge theories, there are more convenient choices of
the regularization scheme; however, for understanding the general ideas,
we will use this cutoﬀ). Eventually we want to send Λ → ∞ but, as
long as we take Λ ﬁnite, our theory has a dependence on the cutoﬀ, and
therefore we begin by deﬁning the theory at ﬁnite Λ admitting that even
the couplings, the masses and the ﬁelds depend on Λ, in a way which for
the moment we leave unspeciﬁed. In λφ4 theory we will therefore write
the Lagrangian at ﬁnite Λ as
L=

1
1
λ0
(∂φ0 )2 − m20 φ20 − φ40 ,
2
2
4!

(5.129)

Renormalization 135

136 Perturbation theory and Feynman diagrams

where the subscript 0 indicates that these quantities depend on the cutoﬀ
Λ: φ0 = φ0 (x; Λ), m0 = m0 (Λ), λ0 = λ0 (Λ). We call φ0 (x; Λ) the bare
ﬁeld, m0 (Λ) the bare mass and λ0 (Λ) the bare coupling.
Consider ﬁrst the two-point amplitude. In this new notation the twopoint function of the bare ﬁeld, eq. (5.112), is written as
0|T {φ0 (x, Λ)φ0 (y, Λ)}|0 c

i
d4 p
e−ip(x−y) .
=
(2π)4 A(Λ, p2 )p2 − m20 (Λ) − B(Λ)

(5.130)

The i prescription in the denominator is understood. We saw in eq. (5.108)
that B(Λ) is divergent as Λ2 at the one-loop level,
B(Λ) =


λ0 (Λ)  2
Λ + O(log Λ) + ﬁnite parts ,
2
32π

and A diverges as log Λ at the two-loop level,


Λ2
A(Λ, p2 ) = 1 + λ20 (Λ) c1 log 2 + c2 .
p

(5.131)

(5.132)

Observe that A and B also have an implicit, and as yet unspeciﬁed,
dependence on Λ through λ0 (Λ). For simplicity, let us at ﬁrst examine eq. (5.130) at the one-loop level. Then the two-point function in
momentum space is
i
,
(5.133)
2
2
p − m0 (Λ) − B(Λ)
i.e. A = 1, and we recall that B is independent of p2 . The basic idea
is that neither m0 (Λ) nor B(Λ) are physically observable. Rather, the
physical or renormalized mass mR is deﬁned by
m2R = m20 (Λ) + B(Λ) .

(5.134)

In other words, we ﬁx the physical mass requiring that the propagator
has a pole at p2 = m2R . Since m0 (Λ) is a parameter completely in our
hands, we choose it such that it cancels the divergence in B(Λ), and it
leaves us with a value of mR ﬁnite and equal to the measured physical
value.
At the two-loop level the situation is slightly more complicated because there is also the divergence coming from A. However, we still
deﬁne mR as the position of the pole of the propagator, i.e. by the
condition
(5.135)
[A(Λ, p2 )p2 − m20 (Λ) − B(Λ)]|p2 =m2R = 0 .
This is one condition, and is not yet suﬃcient to eliminate the two
divergencies coming from A and B. However, expanding the function
A(p2 )p2 − m20 − B near p2 = m2R , we ﬁnd that close to the pole

iZ
+ ... ,
(5.136)
d4 x eipx 0|T {φ0 (x, Λ)φ0 (0, Λ)}|0 c = 2
p − m2R

5.6

Renormalization 137

where

$−1

 #

d
Λ
2 2
Z = Z λ0 (Λ),
A(Λ, p )p
,
≡
mR
d(p2 )
|p2 =m2

(5.137)

R

and the dots represent terms that are ﬁnite for p2 = m2R . For later
reference, we have also written explicitly that Z depends also on the
bare coupling λ0 . Furthermore, being dimensionless, Z can depend on
Λ and mR only through the combination Λ/mR . Now we deﬁne the
renormalized ﬁeld φR from


Λ
1/2
λ0 (Λ),
(5.138)
φ0 (x, Λ) = Z
φR (x) .
mR
By deﬁnition φR is independent of the cutoﬀ, and this ﬁxes the dependence of φ0 on Λ. The factor Z 1/2 is called the wave function renormalization, or ﬁeld renormalization. We see from eq. (5.136) that in
terms of φR the two-point function is the same as that of a free ﬁeld
with mass mR , and therefore Z is the same factor that appeared in the
LSZ reduction formula (5.46). In other words, Z disappears from the
LSZ formula if, instead of using the bare ﬁeld φ0 , as we did in eq. (5.46),
we use the “physical”, renormalized ﬁeld. Thus, after mass and wave
function renormalization, the on-shell two-point function is ﬁnite.11
Now that we have made the two-point function ﬁnite, we turn our
attention to the four-point function. At one-loop there are two types
of divergences in the four-point function. The ﬁrst is associated to the
graphs in Fig. 5.9, and we have seen that it is a logarithmic divergence.
The second is associated with graphs like Fig. 5.17, i.e. tadpoles on
external legs. The crucial point is that the divergence due to tadpoles
is automatically cured by the renormalization of the two-point function,
i.e. by the mass and wave function renormalization, because it is a divergence that concerns only a subgraph of Fig. 5.17, corresponding to
a two-point function, and we have already made the two-point function
ﬁnite. The graphs in Fig. 5.9 give instead a genuinely new divergence,
and we computed it in eq. (5.106). Actually, to renormalize the divergence, we have ﬁrst to be more careful in specifying the kinematical
conﬁguration. A simple choice is to consider the scattering amplitude in
the limit of zero spatial momentum, i.e. p1 = p2 = k1 = k2 = (mR , 0).
With this choice it is clear that, in eq. (5.106), the only scale that can
be combined with Λ to give a dimensionless argument of the logarithm
is mR , so we rewrite eq. (5.106) (with our new notation λ0 for the bare
coupling)
(5.139)
iM2→2 (pi = ki = 0) ≡ −iλR



Λ
+ ﬁnite parts + O(λ30 ) .
= −iλ0 (Λ) 1 − λ0 (Λ) β0 log
mR
Now, λR is the quantity that is measured performing a scattering experiment and which therefore must be ﬁnite. We call it the physical, or
renormalized coupling. We therefore choose the parameter λ0 (Λ), which

11

The fact that to see the wave function
renormalization we had to go to twoloops is a peculiarity of λφ4 theory. In
general theories Z = 1 already at one
loop.

Fig. 5.17 A tadpole on an external

line.

138 Perturbation theory and Feynman diagrams

is completely in our hands, requiring that λR is ﬁnite, and equal to the
desired value.
If we consider the scattering amplitude in a diﬀerent kinematical
m2R , we ﬁnd instead an
regime, for instance when (p1 + p2 )2 ≡ q 2
amplitude



Λ2
β0
2
log 2 + ﬁnite parts + O(λ30 ) .
iM2→2 (q ) = −iλ0 (Λ) 1 − λ0 (Λ)
2
q
(5.140)
This result follows from the explicit computation, but it is easily understood observing that in the limit q 2
m2R the relevant dimensional
2
2
scale is provided by q rather than mR , so it is this scale that combines
with Λ to provide a dimensionless argument of the logarithm. Writing
log(Λ2 /q 2 ) = log(Λ2 /m2R ) + log(m2R /q 2 ) and using the deﬁnition of λR
from eq. (5.139), we get

β0
q2
2
(5.141)
iM2→2 (q ) = −iλR 1 + λR log 2 + O(λ3R ) ,
2
mR

Fig. 5.18 A one-particle reducible

graph. Cutting along the dashed
line, the graph is separated in two
disconnected pieces.

where we could replace λ20 with λ2R since terms O(λ30 ) are neglected
anyway.
The important point that we understand from eq. (5.141) is that,
once we have made ﬁnite the four-point amplitude at a given value of
the external momenta, it is ﬁnite for all momenta.
In this way we have cured the divergences of the two-point and fourpoint amplitudes. We can continue and examine the six-point amplitude and so on. In principle, what can happen is that in the Feynman
graphs that determine the six-point amplitude there are divergent subgraphs that are automatically cured by the renormalization of the twoand four-point functions plus possibly some genuinely new divergence.
Figure 5.18 shows an example of a graph contributing to the six-point
amplitude with a divergent subgraph that is automatically cured by the
renormalization of the four-point function. Observe that it is possible to
separate this graph into two disconnected parts by cutting a single line,
along the dashed line in Fig. 5.18. Such graphs are called one-particle
reducible, and cannot carry genuinely new divergences.
If instead it is not possible to make the graph disconnected by cutting
just one line, the graph is called one-particle irreducible (often abbreviated 1PI), and can in principle carry genuinely new divergences.
In the case of λφ4 theory we saw that in the four-point function there
were graphs cured by the renormalization of the two-point function and
a genuinely new divergence which required the renormalization of λR .
If this were the case also for the six-point function, after the renormalization of the ﬁeld, of the mass and of λ we would still be left with
a divergent result for the six-point function. To cure it, we could introduce a new term proportional to φ6 in the Lagrangian, with a new
bare coupling λ(6),0 (Λ). This would give a further contribution to the
six-point amplitude, and we could choose λ(6),0 (Λ) so that it cancels
the divergence that was left. This means that we should again ﬁx the
renormalized coupling λ(6),R by comparison with experiment.

5.6

If this process never terminates, and each time that we consider a new
amplitude with a larger number of external legs we must introduce a new
coupling and ﬁx the amplitude at a certain energy by comparison with
experiment, then the theory that we have constructed by this renormalization procedure is ﬁnite, because all divergences have been reabsorbed,
but (apparently) has little predictive power, because we have introduced
an inﬁnite number of parameters, to be ﬁxed by experiment. Then the
theory is called non-renormalizable. Actually, even non-renormalizable
theories can be very useful, but we postpone their discussion until Section 5.8.
If instead at some point the process terminates, we just need to eliminate the divergences from a few amplitudes, ﬁxing a few parameters
by comparison with experiment, and then all the other amplitudes are
automatically ﬁnite. In this case the theory is called renormalizable.
The criterion for understanding when a theory is renormalizable turns
out to be quite simple and holds not only for the scalar theory that we are
considering, but more generally (although the actual proof of renormalizability for gauge theories, and especially for non-abelian gauge theory,
is far from trivial!). Consider for example a theory with interaction
Hamiltonian λφn , with n  3, integer, in four space-time dimensions.
In a general Feynman diagram there will be an integration over d4 k for
each loop in the graph and a factor of the type 1/((k − p)2 − m2 ) for
each propagator on an internal line, where k is one of the integration
variables (or a linear combination of integration variables) and p is a
combination of external momenta. So each loop integration carries four
powers of momenta at the numerator and each internal line two powers
at the denominator. In this theory the superﬁcial degree of divergence
D is then deﬁned as
(5.142)
D = 4L − 2Ni
where L is the number of loops and Ni the number of internal lines. The
number of loops can be expressed as
L = Ni − V + 1

(5.143)

where V is the number of vertices of the graph. We can check it observing
that the simplest tree level graph has one vertex and no internal line, so
V = 1, Ni = 0 and eq. (5.143) correctly gives L = 0. Adding a second
vertex and connecting it to the ﬁrst with just one propagator still gives
a tree level graph, and eq. (5.143) still correctly gives L = 0, since we
have increased both Ni and V by one. Similarly we construct the most
general tree level graph adding each time one vertex and one internal
line. Instead, each time a new vertex is joined by two lines, we have
added a loop and correctly eq. (5.143) shows that L increases by one.
Finally, if the theory is λφn , there are n lines at each vertex, so
2Ni + Ne = nV

(5.144)

where Ne is the number of external lines and the factor 2 reﬂects the fact
that one internal line connects two vertices. Combining these expressions

Renormalization 139

140 Perturbation theory and Feynman diagrams

we ﬁnd
D = (n − 4)V + 4 − Ne .

(5.145)

If D  0 we expect that the diagram is divergent, unless some numerical
in the leading term appears (D = 0 corresponds to
 4 cancellation
d k/k 4 , i.e. to a logarithmic divergence). If D < 0 the diagram is
not necessarily convergent. In fact, the various integrations and propagators could be distributed in such a way that there is a divergent
subgraph. However, these divergences are cured by the renormalization
of the Green’s function with a smaller number of points, and do not
bother us. Genuinely new divergences instead do not appear if D < 0.
The condition for renormalizability therefore is that only a ﬁnite number of Green’s functions have D  0. Consider ﬁrst the case n = 4,
i.e. λφ4 theory. Then eq. (5.145) gives D = 4 − Ne . Therefore the
only genuinely divergent graphs are those with no external legs, i.e. the
vacuum-to-vacuum amplitude which diverges as Λ4 (and that will be
examined more closely in Section 5.7 in connection with the cosmological constant problem), the two-point function that, as we have seen,
diverges as Λ2 , and the four-point function that diverges as log Λ. After renormalizing these divergences, there is no other divergence to be
cured, so the theory is renormalizable. Similarly, a theory λφ3 is renormalizable since (n − 4)V = −V gives a negative contribution to D, and
therefore helps the convergence.
If instead n > 4, for each Ne given there are graphs with a suﬃciently
large number of vertices which have D  0. Therefore all Green’s functions, at a suﬃciently large order in perturbation theory, have genuinely
new divergences, and the theory is not renormalizable.
The criterion n  4 for λφn theory can be understood in a way that
can be generalized to other theories. The ﬁeld φ has dimensions
of mass,
 4
2
since the action is dimensionless, the kinetic
term
is
∼
d
x(∂φ)
, and
 4
n
∂ ∼ 1/length = mass. Requiring that d x λn φ is dimensionless, we
see that the coupling λn has dimensions of (mass)4−n . Then the criterion
n  4 means that:
Terms in the Lagrangian whose coeﬃcients have either a positive mass
dimension or are dimensionless are renormalizable. Terms with negative mass dimension are not renormalizable.
In this form the criterion for renormalizability turns out to hold quite
generally, and is not restricted to φn theories; the proofs however can be
very complicated and depend on the details of the theory. The intuitive
reason for this is however easily understood. If the coupling constant has
for instance dimensions 1/M 2 (as would be the case for a term φ6 in four
space-time dimensions) each new vertex brings in a new factor 1/M 2 .
For dimensional reasons, this must be compensated by some parameter
with dimensions of mass squared. Barring cancellations, we therefore
expect to ﬁnd divergences with higher and higher powers of Λ2 /M 2 .

5.7

5.7

Vacuum energy and the cosmological constant problem 141

Vacuum energy and the cosmological
constant problem

In Section 4.1.1 we found that the vacuum energy is divergent. It was our
ﬁrst example of a divergence in ﬁeld theory, and we simply disposed of it
eliminating the inﬁnity by hand, with the physical argument that only
energy diﬀerences can be observed. This physical argument is however
incorrect when we include gravity, since in general relativity any form of
energy contributes to the gravitational interaction. To understand this
point, we recall a few basic facts of general relativity and of cosmology
(see e.g. Kolb and Turner (1990)).
The energy density of the vacuum, ρvac , is conveniently written as
ρvac =

Λ
,
8πGN

(5.146)

where Λ is called the cosmological constant (in this section we reserve
the symbol Λ for the cosmological constant and we denote the cutoﬀ by
Λcut). This normalization is chosen so that the Einstein equations of
general relativity, in the presence of a cosmological constant, read12
Gµν = 8πGTµν + Λgµν

(5.147)

where gµν is the metric, Gµν is the Einstein tensor, which contains up to
two derivatives of the metric, and Tµν is the energy–momentum tensor of
matter. The Universe on very large scales is in a ﬁrst approximation homogeneous, and can be described by the Friedmann–Robertson–Walker
(FRW) metric,
ds2 = dt2 − R2 (t)(dx2 + dy 2 + dz 2 )

(5.148)

i.e. gµν = (1, −R2 , −R2 , −R2 ) in these coordinates; R(t) is known as the
scale factor (actually we have restricted for simplicity to a spatially ﬂat
Universe, otherwise the spatial part of the metric is more complicated).
The expansion of the Universe is encoded in the fact that R(t) is growing.
The energy–momentum tensor of a ﬂuid of matter is of the form T µ ν =
(ρ, −p, −p, −p), where ρ is the energy density and p is the pressure.
Then, using the above form of the metric, one can show that eq. (5.147)
implies an equation for the acceleration R̈,
R̈
4πGN
=−
(ρ + 3p) .
R
3

(5.149)

For ordinary matter ρ and p are positive, therefore ρ+3p > 0 and R̈ < 0:
the eﬀect of ordinary matter is to produce a deceleration of the expansion
of the Universe. Instead, we see from eq. (5.147) that the eﬀect of Λ on
the equation for R̈ is formally equivalent to that of a ﬂuid with energy–
momentum tensor T µ ν = (Λ/8πG)δνµ = ρvac δνµ , and therefore to a ﬂuid
with ρ = ρvac and p = −ρvac . This means that ρ + 3p = −2ρvac < 0:
a positive vacuum energy density contributes to accelerate, rather than
decelerate the Universe!

12

The signs depend on a number of
conventions on the metric signature,
Riemann tensors, etc. Here we are
following the conventions used for instance in Kolb and Turner (1990) and
Landau and Lifshitz, vol. II (1979).

142 Perturbation theory and Feynman diagrams

A detection of the vacuum energy is therefore in principle possible
from cosmological measurements. Without entering into the details that
are beyond the scope of this course, we just mention that the most
important observations have been obtained from type Ia supernovae and
from the ﬂuctuations of the cosmic microwave background (CMB). The
result is usually expressed introducing the quantity
ρvac
ΩΛ =
,
(5.150)
ρc
where ρc is the critical density for closing the Universe. The combination
of supernovae and CMB measurement indicates a non-zero value ΩΛ 
0.7 ± 0.1. Using the known value of ρc , this means that
−3
eV .
ρ1/4
vac  2 × 10

(5.151)

This result stimulates us to look in more detail into the problem of the
vacuum energy, using the language of renormalization that we have just
developed. As we saw in Section 4.1.1, when we compute the vacuum
energy density we ﬁnd a result that diverges quartically with the cutoﬀ,
ρvac = cΛ4cut ,

(5.152)

with c some numerical constant. According to the general rules of renormalization of QFT, we then say that the correct starting point is a Lagrangian which also has a bare vacuum energy density. So, for instance,
for a λφ4 theory we would generalize eq. (5.129) to
L=

1
1
λ0
(∂φ0 )2 − m20 φ20 − φ40 − ρ0 ,
2
2
4!

(5.153)

where the bare vacuum energy ρ0 depends on the cutoﬀ Λcut , similarly to
m0 , λ0 , φ0 . Computing the vacuum energy density with this Lagrangian
we now ﬁnd
(5.154)
ρvac = ρ0 (Λcut ) + c Λ4cut .
The bare quantity ρ0 is a parameter completely in our hands; we can
choose it positive or negative, as we wish, and we ﬁx it requiring that
the physical energy density of the vacuum ρvac has the value determined
by experiment. It is important to make clear two points:
13
In string theory, at least as far as the
masses and couplings are concerned,
the question of why they have certain
values becomes equivalent to why the
extra dimensions have a certain geometry (compare with Exercise 3.6) or why
certain ﬁelds acquire a given vacuum
expectation value, so in this sense they
become at least meaningful dynamical questions, which however presently
we do not know how to answer. Instead, for the cosmological constant,
even string theory presently does not
shed any new light.

• In ﬁeld theory quantities like the cosmological constant, the elementary particle masses, the couplings (such as the ﬁne structure
coupling), etc., cannot be predicted. They are just ﬁxed, by the
renormalization procedure, to the experimentally observed values.
Questions such as why the cosmological constant has a certain
value, or why the electron mass is about 0.5 MeV, or why the ﬁne
structure constant is about 1/137 strictly speaking are ill deﬁned
in the framework of quantum ﬁeld theory.13
• The bare quantities, such as ρ0 (Λcut ), are objects which are useful
in the intermediate steps of the calculations, but they have no
physical meaning. They are just chosen so that they cancel the
divergences and leave us with the desired renormalized quantity.

5.7

Vacuum energy and the cosmological constant problem 143

For these reasons, a possible attitude could be simply to take notice of
the value (5.151) and observe that in QFT we can ﬁx the renormalized
vacuum energy density to this value. However, this value of the vacuum
energy density is probably trying to tell us something very important
that we do not yet understand. There are two main reasons for this.
(i) A ﬁne tuning argument: even if strictly speaking in the framework
of QFT we are not really allowed to ask why a renormalized quantity
has a given value, still we can make the following observation. We know
experimentally that, at least up to an energy scale of the order of one
TeV, Nature is well described by a quantum ﬁeld theory, the Standard
Model. This means that in the Standard Model the cutoﬀ Λcut can be
taken to be at least 1 TeV (= 1012 eV), and eq. (5.154) numerically
reads something like
(2 × 10−3 eV)4 = ρ0 (Λcut ) + c (1012 eV)4 .

(5.155)

Therefore ρ0 (Λcut ) must be chosen so that it cancels something of order
1048 eV4 , leaving something of order 10−11 eV4 . Even if ρ0 (Λcut ) is a
parameter that we can choose at will, and of no physical meaning, still
this requires an incredible ﬁne tuning, at the level of 60 decimal ﬁgures,
and in this sense it seems very unnatural. Furthermore, this ﬁne tuning does not show up for most other observables in QFT, and is really
speciﬁc to the vacuum energy (and to the Higgs mass, see below). The
point is that most quantities have logarithmic, rather than power-like
divergences. For instance, in QED at one-loop the renormalized electron
mass m is related to the bare electron mass m0 (Λcut ) by


Λ2
3α
log cut
m = m0 1 +
.
4π
m20

(5.156)

The cutoﬀ Λcut appears only inside the log, and in front of the log we
have α which is small. Therefore, even if we are so bold as to push
the cutoﬀ to the Planck scale, Λcut ∼ 1019 GeV, with m0 ∼ MeV we
have (3α/4π) log Λ2 /m20 ∼ 0.1, so this is really a small correction and to
reproduce a physical electron mass m  0.5 MeV we must indeed take
a value m0 of the same order of magnitude. Therefore here there is no
ﬁne tuning problem.14
(ii) The really crucial point, however, is that the milli-eV scale indicated by the experimental results does not remind us of anything meaningful in particle physics (except possibly neutrino masses, but there
is no reason why the mass of any speciﬁc particle should be related to
ρvac ), so it is diﬃcult to see how such a value could be derived from fundamental physics. And especially, why, of all possible energy scales, it
turns out that this value is just comparable to the energy density needed
for closing the Universe?

14

The only other important situation
where one is confronted with a ﬁne tuning problem similar to that of the vacuum energy is when we consider the
renormalization of the mass of a scalar
ﬁeld. As we have seen in eqs. (5.131)
and (5.134), the divergence in the mass
of a scalar ﬁeld is quadratic, rather than
logarithmic. If we say that the cutoﬀ is
given by the Planck scale MPl = 1019
GeV, this poses a ﬁne tuning problem
for the Higgs ﬁeld, which is a scalar ﬁeld
predicted by the Standard Model, and
is expected to have a mass around a few
hundred GeV. In fact in this case the
bare mass m0 should satisfy something
like (102 GeV)2 = m20 + (1019 GeV)2 .
However, the problem here is diﬀerent
from the cosmological constant problem, since it really depends on the form
of the vacuum ﬂuctuations from the
TeV scale up to the Planck scale, about
which we know nothing experimentally.
In particular, in supersymmetric extensions of the Standard Model this
ﬁne tuning problem disappears because
above a few TeV the contribution of the
vacuum energy due to bosons is canceled by the contribution of fermions.

144 Perturbation theory and Feynman diagrams

5.8

The modern point of view on
renormalizability

The fact that quantum ﬁeld theory is plagued by divergences was already
realized around 1929–1930 by Heisenberg and Pauli and, quite understandably, it was considered a major problem. It was then realized (by
Dyson in 1949, building on work of Feynman, Schwinger, Tomonaga,
and others) that in some theories these divergences can be reabsorbed
into the redeﬁnition of a ﬁnite number of parameters. These theories
were then called renormalizable, and considered “honest” theories, while
non-renormalizable theories were considered intrinsically sick.
The modern point of view (largely stimulated by the work of K. Wilson) is quite diﬀerent. First of all, it is important to realize that the
problem with non-renormalizable theories is not mathematical consistency, but rather predictivity. As we have seen in Section 5.6, we can
reabsorb the inﬁnities of a non-renormalizable theory, but the price is
that any N -point amplitude AN (p1 , . . . , pN ), at a suﬃciently large order
n in perturbation theory, will develop divergences which are not automatically cured by the renormalization of amplitude with less than N
external legs. To cure it we must therefore introduce a new term, and a
new coupling, in the Lagrangian, and then ﬁx this new coupling comparing the contribution to AN at perturbative order n with the experimental
value.
The fact that in principle we have to ﬁx an inﬁnite number of quantities by comparison with experiment is however only an apparent disaster.
The point is that, as we have seen, in a typical non-renormalizable theory the coupling is not dimensionless, but rather has the dimensions of
inverse powers of mass. We suppose for deﬁniteness that the coupling λ
is dimensionally the inverse of a mass squared, so that it can be written
as 1/M 2 , for some mass-scale M ; we also assume for simplicity that
we have just one typical momentum (or energy) scale, and we denote
it by E. Then the renormalized perturbative expansion of an N -point
amplitude AN up to order (λ2 )n reads


E2
E4
E 2n
AN (E) = A0N (E) 1 + c1 2 + c2 4 + . . . + cn 2n .
(5.157)
M
M
M
The quantities c1 , . . . cn−1 are ﬁnite and calculable, once we have renormalized the amplitudes with less than N points. Because of the genuinely new divergence at some order n, the coeﬃcient cn must instead
be ﬁxed by comparison with experiment, and this is the source of the
loss of predictivity. However, we can now realize that at low energy,
E
M , the lack of predictivity on cn becomes completely irrelevant,
because anyhow cn is multiplied by the very small quantity (E/M )2n .
Therefore, if we want to make computations with a given accuracy, we
can just renormalize a corresponding ﬁnite number of amplitudes and, as
long as E
M , our ignorance about higher-order divergences is beyond
the desired accuracy.

5.8

The modern point of view on renormalizability 145

This means that:
Non-renormalizable theories are perfectly acceptable low-energy
theories.
At E ∼ M the expansion (5.157) blows up, signaling that the theory
is no longer meaningful, and a more complete theory must take its place.
We therefore see that non-renormalizable theories have a built-in scale
M that provides their limit of validity.
Renormalizable theories, in contrast, have no built-in mass-scale M
which tells us from the beginning that we cannot trust them at E > M ,
and in principle they are mathematically consistent and predictive at
any energy scale. The distinction between renormalizable and nonrenormalizable theories, however, can be more mathematical than physical. For instance QED is a renormalizable theory, and so we could
naively hope that it correctly describes Nature up to arbitrary energy
scales. But in fact, experimentally we know that at a mass-scale M ∼
100 GeV QED merges with weak interactions in a larger theory, the
Standard Model, and so pure QED is in any case a low-energy approximation to a more complete theory.
In other words, renormalizability is related to the behavior of the
theory at inﬁnitely large energies or, equivalently, at inﬁnitesimally small
distances. As such, it reﬂects rather formal mathematical properties
of the ﬁeld theory, since we can never test a theory up to inﬁnitely
large energies, not only practically, but even in principle, since quantum
gravity must come into play at the latest at the Planck scale, M Pl ∼
1019 GeV, i.e. at distances l ∼ 10−33 cm.
Rather than focus on the concept of renormalizability, the modern
approach focuses on the concept of eﬀective ﬁeld theory. The really
crucial point is that if we want to compute, with a given precision,
processes that take place at a given length-scale l (or, equivalently, at a
corresponding energy scale E), we do not need to know the full theory
at inﬁnitely small distances or inﬁnitely high energies. To study what
happens in an atom, at l ∼ 10−8 cm, we do not need to know what
happens at the scale l ∼ 10−17 cm, typical of weak interactions, except
if we are looking for extremely ﬁne eﬀects, and certainly we do not need
to know what happens at l ∼ 10−33 cm where quantum gravity becomes
important. Once we have ﬁxed the scale l which we are interested in
and the level of precision that we want to get from our computations,
all we need to know is the eﬀective theory down to a lenghtscale l∗ a
few orders of magnitude smaller than l. How many orders of magnitude
depends, of course, on the level of precision at which we aim.
In Chapter 8 we will discuss the Fermi theory of weak interactions,
which is the low-energy limit of the electroweak theory. We will see that
it is an extremely useful low-energy theory, despite the fact that it is not
renormalizable.
A very important example of a non-renormalizable theory is the theory obtained quantizing general relativity. The coupling constant in this
case is the Newton constant which dimensionally, in our units  = c = 1,

146 Perturbation theory and Feynman diagrams
2
is the inverse of mass squared, GN = 1/MPl
. Therefore quantum gravity is not renormalizable. However, the loss of predictivity comes into
play only in processes that probe space-time down to distances of order
of the Planck length lPl = 1/MPl  10−33 cm. Such small scales will
never be reached in accelerator physics, and probably our best hopes
to get information on such small length-scales, or correspondingly high
energies, come from some relics of the Big Bang. In any case, in “normal” conditions, classical general relativity gives a completely adequate
description, and the lack or renormalizability of the quantum theory is
irrelevant.
In Section 9.5 we will come back to the eﬀective Lagrangian approach,
and we will see that it is rooted in the concept of universality for critical
phenomena.

5.9

The running of coupling constants

A surprising eﬀect of the renormalization procedure is that, after renormalization, the coupling “constants” are not constant at all, but they
depend on the energy. We have already seen this in eq. (5.141), where
we computed the 2 → 2 scattering amplitude when the center of mass
energy squared is q 2 . This is nothing but the eﬀective coupling constant
at E 2 = q 2 , and we see that it is diﬀerent from the value λR at E = 0.
We found in eq. (5.141) that at energies E
mR the amplitude can be
written as
iM2→2 (q 2 ) = −iλeﬀ (E) ,
(5.158)
where the eﬀective one-loop coupling constant λeﬀ (E) is given by
λeﬀ (E) = λR + λ2R β0 log

E
+ O(λ3R ) .
mR

(5.159)

The same formula holds in the limit E
mR , as one can see from
explicit calculation. We see that the sign of the coeﬃcient β0 plays an
especially important role. If β0 > 0 the coupling increases in the UV
(until it becomes large and we cannot trust the perturbative expression).
If instead β0 < 0 the coupling becomes smaller when we go to higher
energies.
Theories where the coupling becomes small in the UV are called
asymptotically free. Asymptotic freedom means that at large energies
(and therefore at short distances) the ﬁelds which appear in the Lagrangian can be treated perturbatively. The other side of the coin, however, is that in an asymptotically free theory at low energies (i.e. large
distances) the coupling becomes strong, and the perturbative treatment
is inadequate. In this regime, the degrees of freedom that one actually
observes are not described by the ﬁelds that enter in the Lagrangian, but
are rather composite objects built from these more fundamental degrees
of freedom, and bound by the strong interaction.
The most important example of this situation is QCD. As we will see
in Chapter 10, in QCD the basic ﬁelds which enter the Lagrangian are

5.9

The running of coupling constants 147

quarks and gluons, and at distances l
1 fm their interaction can be
treated perturbatively. At l ∼ 1 fm, however, the interaction becomes
strong and quarks and gluons do not even appear as free particles, but
rather they are conﬁned into hadrons.
In this section we study the dependence of the coupling constants
on the energy (the “running of the coupling constants” as it is usually
called) in more detail. The rest of this section is more advanced and can
be skipped at a ﬁrst reading.
First of all, let us be more general: rather than focusing on the four-point
function, we consider a generic n-point function. A general renormalized npoint function ΓR depends on the external momenta pi (or simply on just one
invariant q 2 if we choose a simpler kinematical situation, rather than the most
general), on the renormalized coupling gR (for a general theory, not necessarily
of a scalar ﬁeld, we use the notation g rather than λ for the coupling; we also
assume for simplicity that there is just one coupling, but the generalization
is straightforward), and on the scale µ used to deﬁne the renormalization
procedure,
(5.160)
ΓR = ΓR (pi ; gR , µ) .
In the previous section we renormalized the theory choosing µ = mR : we ﬁrst
deﬁned mR as the position of the pole in the propagator; we then deﬁned the
renormalized ﬁelds requiring that their two-point function has residue +i at
the pole p2 = m2R . We ﬁnally ﬁxed the ﬁnite value of the four-point function
at zero momentum, i.e. when the square of the center-of-mass energy s was
equal to 4m2R . So mR was always our mass-scale used to ﬁx the ﬁnite values
of the renormalized quantities.
However we can be more general, and use a generic mass-scale µ to deﬁne
the renormalization procedure. For instance, we can decide to ﬁx the value
of the renormalized constant looking at the four-point amplitude at a value
m2R , or even at a space-like value q 2 = −µ2 . It is quite useful to
q 2 = µ2
keep µ generic and see what are the consequences of a change in µ.
The relation between ΓR and the bare n-point function Γ0 is15
«
„
Λ
ΓR (pi ; gR , µ) = Z −n/2 g0 (Λ),
Γ0 (pi ; g0 (Λ), Λ) .
(5.161)
µ
The important point is that ΓR , by deﬁnition, does not depend on the cutoﬀ
Λ. We have adjusted the bare coupling, bare mass and ﬁeld renormalization
just in such a way that all renormalized Green’s functions are ﬁnite. In the
following we will be interested in the situation where the typical energy scales
are much bigger than the masses, and we will neglect all mass dependences.
Γ0 instead has been computed in the regularized theory, using the bare
coupling and the bare masses, and therefore depends on the cutoﬀ Λ both explicitly and, implicitly, through the bare coupling g0 (Λ) and the bare masses,
while of course it is independent of µ, because the scale µ enters only afterwards, when we ﬁx the value of the renormalized Green’s function with a
renormalization prescription at momenta given by µ, e.g. at q 2 = µ2 for the
four-point function.
The factor Z −n/2 is the contribution from the wave function renormalization
of the n ﬁelds. As we have seen, it is obtained computing ﬁrst the two-point
amplitude in the bare theory. The result of this ﬁrst step is therefore a function
of Λ, of g0 (Λ) and of p2 ; then Z is deﬁned ﬁxing the value of the numerator of

15
We assume for simplicity that in the
theory there is only one type of ﬁeld.
Otherwise, the wave function renormalization factors depend on the ﬁeld, and
in eq. (5.161) there will be a factor
Z −1/2 for each ﬁeld.

148 Perturbation theory and Feynman diagrams
the two-point function at a given value of p2 = µ2 . For instance, in Section 5.6
we ﬁxed it choosing µ = mR and requiring that the residue of the pole of the
propagator at p2 = m2R is +i. So, in general, Z is a function of Λ, g0 (Λ) and
µ (and not of p2 ), see e.g. eq. (5.137). Since Z is a dimensionless quantity, it
can only depend on Λ and µ through their ratio Λ/µ, in the high-energy limit
in which all masses can be neglected.
Since ΓR is independent of Λ, we can write
Λ

dΓR
=0
dΛ

(5.162)

and using eq. (5.161) we obtain
»
Λ

–
∂
∂
+ β(g0 )
− nη(g0 ) Γ0 (pi ; g0 , Λ) = 0 ,
∂Λ
∂g0

(5.163)

where
dg0
,
dΛ

(5.164)

1 d
Λ
log Z .
2 dΛ

(5.165)

β(g0 ) ≡ Λ
η(g0 ) ≡

16

In principle, η depends also on Λ/µ.
However Z depends on Λ/µ through
terms ∼ log Λ/µ, which after taking
the derivative with respect to log Λ
are independent of µ. There are also
subleading terms log log Λ/µ in Z; after taking the derivative these become
1/(log Λ/µ) and disappear in the limit
Λ/µ → ∞, leaving a ﬁnite function
η(g0 ).

Equation (5.163) is called a renormalization group equation, and eqs. (5.164)
and (5.165) deﬁne the beta function and the eta function of the theory.16
Equations (5.163)–(5.165) can be solved by the method of characteristics.
We introduce a dilatation parameter u and the solution is given by
Γ0 (pi ; g0 ,

Λ
−n/2
) = Zeﬀ (u)Γ0 (pi ; geﬀ (u), Λ)
u

(5.166)

where geﬀ (u) is deﬁned as the solution of the equation
u

dgeﬀ
= β(geﬀ (u))
du

(5.167)

with the initial condition geﬀ (1) = g0 , and Zeﬀ (u) is deﬁned as the solution of
1 d
u
log Zeﬀ = η(geﬀ (u))
2 du

(5.168)

with the initial condition Zeﬀ (1) = 1. We see that geﬀ plays the role of an
eﬀective bare coupling constant, and a change in the cutoﬀ is equivalent to a
change in geﬀ and in Zeﬀ . To study what happens as we remove the cutoﬀ we
must take the limit u → 0. Equation (5.167) can be written in the integrated
form
Z geff (u)
dg 
= log u .
(5.169)
β(g  )
g0
We see that in the limit u → 0 the integral on the left-hand side must diverge,
and this is possible only if, as u → 0, geﬀ (u) approaches a zero of the beta
function.
In general the renormalization of the coupling has the form
gR = g0 − β0 g02 log Λ + O(g03 ) .

(5.170)

The dependence of g0 on the cutoﬀ is obtained inverting the above relation,
2
3
log Λ + O(gR
)
g0 = gR + β0 gR

(5.171)

5.9

The running of coupling constants 149

and therefore

dg0
(5.172)
= β0 g02 + O(g03 ) .
d log Λ
This shows that there is always a zero of the beta function at g0 = 0, and it
is possible to remove the cutoﬀ while at the same time sending g0 (Λ) → 0.
In other words, given a regularized theory, with a cutoﬀ in momentum
space or, for example, on a space-time lattice (which is another possible UV
regulator) we ﬁnd the limit Λ → ∞ (or the continuum limit in the case of a
lattice) tuning the bare couplings toward a zero of the beta function. This is a
way to see things that has very important applications to statistical mechanics
and critical phenomena, as well as in lattice gauge theory, and we will come
back to it in Section 9.5.
β(g0 ) ≡

There is another way to extract information from eq. (5.161), which is
more useful from the point of view of particle physics. We rather write the
equation as Γ0 = Z n/2 ΓR and we use the fact that Γ0 is independent of
the renormalization point µ. Instead ΓR depends on µ explicitly, and also
through the renormalized mass and coupling. Let us again neglect all mass
terms. Then we write
»
–
∂
∂
dΓ0
= µ
+ β(gR )
+ nγ(gR ) ΓR (pi ; gR , µ) .
(5.173)
0=µ
dµ
∂µ
∂gR
where now
β(gR ) = µ

dgR
dµ

(5.174)

and

1 d
µ
log Z .
(5.175)
2 dµ
Equation (5.173) is the Callan–Symanzik equation. This equation is formally
very similar to the one previously studied, but now we have the renormalized
coupling gR rather than the bare coupling g0 . It tells us how ΓR changes
if we change the renormalization point µ. The reason why this equation is
very useful is that, in the high-energy limit where all masses can be neglected,
using dimensional arguments the dependence on µ can be translated into a
dependence on the energy. In fact, if dΓ is the mass dimension of ΓR , then
ΓR (pi ; gR , µ) for dimensional reasons must have the form
«
„
pi
dΓ
(5.176)
ΓR (pi ; gR , µ) = µ F gR ,
µ
γ(gR ) =

with F a dimensionless function. Using again the method of characteristics,
eq. (5.173) implies that
“
µ”
−n/2
= Zeﬀ (u)ΓR (pi ; geﬀ (u), µ)
(5.177)
ΓR p i ; g R ,
u
where now geﬀ (u) is deﬁned as the solution of the equation
u

dgeﬀ
= β(geﬀ (u))
du

(5.178)

with the initial condition geﬀ (1) = gR , where gR is the value of the renormalized coupling constant at the reference scale µ. Similarly, Zeﬀ (u) is deﬁned as
the solution of
1 d
(5.179)
u
log Zeﬀ = −γ(geﬀ (u))
2 du

150 Perturbation theory and Feynman diagrams
with the initial condition Zeﬀ (1) = 1. Using eq. (5.176) we see that
„
«
“
µdΓ
µ”
upi
1
= d F gR ,
ΓR p i ; g R ,
= d ΓR (upi ; gR , µ) .
u
u Γ
µ
u Γ

(5.180)

Combining eqs. (5.177) and (5.180) we ﬁnd
−n/2

ΓR (upi ; gR , µ) = udΓ Zeﬀ

(u)ΓR (pi ; geﬀ (u), µ)

(5.181)

Writing eq. (5.179) in the integrated form, we can rewrite the above expression
as
ﬀ
j Z log u
γ(geﬀ )(u )d log u ΓR (pi ; geﬀ (u), µ) .
ΓR (upi ; gR , µ) = udΓ exp n
0

(5.182)
We see that the rescaling of energies (in the limit when masses can be neglected) is summarized by two eﬀects: ﬁrst of all, naive dimensional analysis
does not work anymore. Instead of a simple overall factor udΓ we get also
a modiﬁcation determined by the γ function; γ is then called the anomalous
dimension. Its origin is in the divergencies of ﬁeld theory, which force us to
introduce a new mass-scale (the cutoﬀ, which is sent to inﬁnity and is replaced
by the renormalization point µ), and spoiled naive dimensional analysis. Second, the coupling gR at the scale µ is replaced by geﬀ (u), or geﬀ (E) with
E = uµ, which is called the running coupling constant. Therefore geﬀ (E)
plays the role of an eﬀective renormalized coupling constant. We see that the
beta function β(g) contains important information. In particular, the sign of
the beta function near g = 0 is crucial, as we will see below and in Section 9.5.
In the case of λφ4 theory the explicit one-loop computation is very simple,
since there is no wave function renormalization at one loop, and the result
comes just from the graph of Fig. 5.9. We computed it in Section 5.5.2 where
we found
3
log Λ ,
(5.183)
λR = λ0 + λ20
16π 2
Therefore the one-loop beta function is
β(λ0 ) = β0 λ20 + O(λ30 ) ,

β0 =

3
.
16π 2

(5.184)

Limiting ourselves to one-loop, the explicit integration of
E

d
λeﬀ = β0 λ2eﬀ ,
dE

(5.185)

with the initial condition λeﬀ (E = µ) = λ∗ , gives
λeﬀ (E) =

λ∗
.
1 − β0 λ∗ log(E/µ)

(5.186)

Comparing with eq. (5.159) we see that the renormalization group (RG) analysis has provided a resummation of a whole class of logarithmic terms. Expanding eq. (5.186) in powers of λ∗ we get
"
#
∞
X
n
cn (E)λ∗
λeﬀ (E) = λ∗ 1 +
(5.187)
n=1

„

with
cn (E) =

E
β0 log
µ

«n
.

(5.188)

5.9

The running of coupling constants 151

We might ask what we have really gained, since we used only the one-loop
beta function, so one might think that eq. (5.187) is not justiﬁed beyond
the term n = 1 that we already knew. However, we will see in Exercise 5.4
that the eﬀect of higher-loop corrections to the beta function is to produce
additional terms proportional to log log E in the denominator of eq. (5.186),
see eq. (5.198). Including these corrections, the coeﬃcients cn are modiﬁed
from the value given in eq. (5.188) to a value of the form
»
–n
E
+ O(log log E) .
cn (E) = β0 log
(5.189)
µ
Then the term in cn proportional to (log E)n is not aﬀected by higher-order
corrections to the beta function, while, at each order n, in cn there are also
terms of order (log E)n−1 and smaller, that are missed using only the one-loop
beta function. Therefore the resummation (5.186) is useful when log(E/µ)
1, since in this case at each order n we have picked the term which dominates
at high energies. In turn, this means that eq. (5.186) is really useful only
1 we have λeﬀ (E)  1
when β0 < 0, since in this case when log(E/µ)
and perturbation theory is consistent. Equation (5.186) is called the leading
logarithms approximation.
However, in the case of λφ4 we have β0 > 0 and therefore the running
coupling increases in the UV. Formally, eq. (5.186) would even predict that
λeﬀ (E) diverges at
j
ﬀ
1
E = µ exp
.
(5.190)
β0 λ∗
Of course this result should not be taken literally, because as soon as λeﬀ (E)
becomes of order one the whole perturbative expansion, even if improved by
RG, blows up and cannot be trusted anymore. The correct conclusion, instead,
is that, even if we started with λ∗  1, there is a critical energy at which the
theory enters in a strong coupling regime.
Besides our toy model λφ4 , it turns out, more importantly, that β0 >
0 in QED. This means that in QED the ﬁne structure constant increases
with energy, and formally there even exists an energy scale where it becomes
strong. The energy similar to eq. (5.190), where formally the one-loop running
coupling diverges, is called the Landau pole. However, the running is very
slow, since it is logarithmic, and long before the theory enters in the strong
coupling regime, we arrive at the electroweak scale, where QED in isolation is
no longer the correct theory. From this point on, the evolution of α must be
studied in the context of the Standard Model and possibly of its high-energy
extensions.
From its low-energy value α = 1/137.035 999 11(46), the ﬁne structure constant at the Z 0 mass MZ = 91.1876 ± 0.0021 GeV grows only to the value17
α(MZ ) =

1
.
127.918 ± 0.018

(5.191)

If instead β0 < 0, we see from eq. (5.186) that the running coupling becomes
smaller and smaller at high energies (and therefore the perturbative result is
more and more accurate). As we mentioned at the beginning of this section,
this property is known as asymptotic freedom and is one of the most important
features of quantum chromodynamics, the theory of strong interactions. The
running of the strong coupling, which is denoted by αs , is well-veriﬁed experimentally, see Fig. 5.19, taken from S. Eidelman et al., Phys. Lett. B592, 1
(2004).

17
To be precise, this is the value of the
ﬁne structure constant, renormalized in
the so-called MS-scheme. We do not
enter into the details of how this is deﬁned. See e.g. Peskin and Schroeder
(1995), page 377.

152 Perturbation theory and Feynman diagrams

αs (µ) at the values of µ where they
are measured. The lines show the
central values and the ±1σ limits
of the average. The ﬁgure clearly
shows the decreases in αs (µ) with
increasing µ. The data are, in increasing order of µ: τ width, Υ decays, deep inelastic scattering, e+ e−
event rate at 22 GeV from the
JADE data, shapes at TRISTAN at
58 GeV, Z width, and e+ e− event
shapes at 135 GeV and 189 GeV.
From S. Eidelman et al., Phys. Lett.
B592, 1 (2004).

0.3

αs(µ)

Fig. 5.19 Summary of the values of

0.2

0.1

0
1

10
µ GeV

10

2

Summary of chapter
• The aim of this chapter was to set up the formalism for computing
the transition amplitudes between initial and ﬁnal states, with
an arbitrary number of incoming and outgoing particles, i.e. to
compute the S-matrix elements (5.16).
• The ﬁrst step is the LSZ formula (5.46), which expresses the Smatrix elements in terms of the vacuum expectation value of a
T -product of ﬁelds. In eq. (5.46), φ is the Heisenberg operator
that evolves with the full Hamiltonian, including the interaction
term, so it is not a free ﬁeld. The T -product is deﬁned in eq. (5.32).
• The next step is given by eq. (5.67), where we write the vacuum
expectation value of the T -product of the ﬁelds φ (which evolve
with the full Hamiltonian) in terms of a free ﬁeld φI (the interaction picture ﬁeld) and of the interaction picture Hamiltonian, HI ,
which is a function of the free ﬁelds φI . The perturbative expansion is the expansion of the exponential in eq. (5.67) in powers of
the interaction Hamiltonian. Observe that from now on the interaction picture ﬁeld φI will be denoted simply by φ, while the fully
interacting ﬁeld will not appear again.
• Expanding the exponential of the Hamiltonian we are left with the
task of computing vacuum expectation values of free ﬁelds. The
actual computation is enormously simpliﬁed by the use of Wick’s
theorem and of Feynman rules (Section 5.5). A basic role is played
by the Feynman propagator (Section 5.4), since Wick’s theorem
reduces the vacuum expectation value of the product of N ﬁelds,
with N arbitrary, to a sum of products of Feynman propagators.

5.9

The running of coupling constants 153

All contributions can be represented graphically by Feynman diagrams.
• We can now perform explicit calculations, and we discover that
Feynman graphs containing closed loops are in general divergent.
To cure these divergences one ﬁrst regularizes the theory, introducing a cutoﬀ. The couplings, ﬁelds and masses which appear
in the Lagrangian are then given a dependence on the cutoﬀ (and
are now called bare couplings, bare ﬁelds and bare masses) chosen
so that the divergences coming from the loops are canceled, and
physical observables (like the renormalized masses and couplings)
are ﬁnite.
• Theories where the divergences can be reabsorbed in a ﬁnite number of parameters are called renormalizable, and are mathematically consistent and predictive, in principle at any energy scale.
Non-renormalizable theories, however, can still be perfectly acceptable low-energy theories, and have an intrinsic mass-scale above
which we know that they must be replaced by a more fundamental theory.
• As a consequence of the renormalization procedure, the physical
(i.e. renormalized) coupling constants are not at all constant.
Rather, their value depends on the energy scale at which they
are measured. If the coupling goes to zero in the high-energy limit
the theory is called asymptotically free. The theory of strong interactions, QCD, turns out to be an asymptotically free theory.

Further reading
• The subject of perturbative expansion, Feynman
diagrams, renormalization, etc. is treated in detail
in all QFT textbooks. Excellent and very detailed
discussions are given in Itzykson and Zuber (1980),
Peskin and Schroeder (1995) and Weinberg (1995).
At a simpler level, a clear book is Mandl and Shaw
(1984).
• The measurement of the cosmological constant discussed in Section 5.7 are very important and are
very likely to become even more important in the
future. A book discussing the modern developments in cosmology is S. Dodelson, Modern Cos-

mology, Elsevier, San Diego 2003. See, e.g. Section 2.4.5 for a discussion of vacuum energy and
type Ia supernovae. Beautiful recent experimental results on type Ia supernova are reported in
A. Riess et al., astro-ph/0402512.
Fluctuations in the cosmic microwave background
(CMB) have been measured with great accuracy
by the WMAP experiment, see e.g. C. L. Bennett
et al., First Year Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy
Probe (WMAP) Observations: Preliminary Maps
and Basic Results, Astrophys. J. Suppl. 148 (2003)
1 [arXiv:astro-ph/0302207].

154 Perturbation theory and Feynman diagrams

Exercises
(5.1) Using the deﬁnition (5.69) and the expression of
the T -product in terms of the theta function, show
that the Feynman propagator is a Green’s function
of the KG operator, i.e. it satisﬁes
(2x + m2 )D(x − y) = −iδ (4) (x − y) .

(5.192)

Show that this is true in general for the T -product
of N -ﬁelds (5.43), justifying the fact that we have
called them the N -point Green’s function.
Solve eq. (5.192) going in momentum space and
study to what boundary conditions corresponds
each prescription for going around the poles.
(5.2) Consider a scalar theory in d space-time dimensions
action has the standard
R kinetic term
R d whose
d x(∂φ)2 and an interaction term dd x λφn . According to the counting argument presented in the
text, for what values of n and d is the theory renormalizable?
(5.3) In the text we have written the interaction as λφ4 .
We could instead study the theory with interaction
term : λφ4 :. Compare the perturbative expansion
in the two cases. In particular, show that the mass
renormalization is diﬀerent, and with the interaction term : λφ4 : it vanishes at O(λ).
(5.4) In QCD the perturbative expansion is an expansion
in powers of g 2 and, at the two-loop level,
dg
(5.193)
= −β0 g 3 − β1 g 5 + O(g 7 ) ,
d log E
with β0 > 0 and β1 > 0. In terms of αs = g 2 /(4π),
dαs
(5.194)
= −b0 α2s − b1 α3s + O(α4s ) ,
d log E

with b0 > 0 and b1 > 0.
(i) Neglect the term O(α3s ) and verify that the solution is
α(E) =

α(µ)
.
1 + b0 α(µ) log(E/µ)

(5.195)

where µ is a mass-scale of reference, used to ﬁx the
initial condition. Deﬁne a new mass-scale ΛQCD as
j
ΛQCD = µ exp −

1
b0 α(µ)

ﬀ
.

(5.196)

Verify that eq. (5.195) can be rewritten as
α(E) =

1
.
b0 log(E/ΛQCD )

(5.197)

Therefore the coupling is small (and the approximation of neglecting the term O(α3s ) in eq. (5.194)
is justiﬁed) when E
ΛQCD . Experimentally,
ΛQCD  200 MeV, and typically the perturbative
calculations are valid at E > 1 GeV.
(ii) Using eq. (5.197) as a lowest-order solution,
show that the solution of eq. (5.194) at two loops,
i.e. including the term O(α3s ), can be written as
1
,
b0 log(E/ΛQCD ) + bb10 log log(E/ΛQCD )
(5.198)
after a suitable redeﬁnition of ΛQCD .
α(E) =

Cross-sections and decay
rates

6

In the previous chapter we have understood how to compute matrix
elements between initial and ﬁnal states and how to make them ﬁnite.
We will see in this chapter how to use these matrix elements to compute
scattering cross-sections and decay rates.

6.1

Relativistic and non-relativistic
normalizations

It is useful ﬁrst of all to clarify a diﬀerence between the relativistic
and non-relativistic normalization of one-particle states. To make the
argument cleaner, we ﬁrst consider a system in a cubic box with spatial
volume V = L3 . At the end of the computation V will be sent to inﬁnity.
Momenta are therefore discrete; for instance, if we use periodic boundary
conditions, p = 2πn/L with n = (nx , ny , nz ) a vector with integer
components. In non-relativistic quantum mechanics a one-particle state
with momentum p in the coordinate representation is given by a plane
wave
ψp (x) = C eip·x
(6.1)
and the normalization constant is ﬁxed by the condition that there is
one particle in the volume V ,

d3 x |ψp (x)|2 = 1 .
(6.2)
V

√
This ﬁxes C = 1/ V . Wave functions with diﬀerent momenta are orthogonal, and therefore

d3 x ψp∗ 1 (x)ψp2 (x) = δp1 ,p2 .
(6.3)
V

Writing ψp (x) = x|p and using the completeness relation
1, we can rewrite this as
p1 |p2 (N R) = δp1 ,p2 .



d3 x |x x| =
(6.4)

The superscript (N R) reminds us that the states have been normalized
according to the conventions of non-relativistic quantum mechanics.

6.1 Normalizations

155

6.2 Decay rates

156

6.3 Cross-sections

158

6.4 Two-body ﬁnal states

160

6.5 Resonances

163

6.6 Born approximation

167

6.7 Solved problems

171

156 Cross-sections and decay rates

In relativistic QFT this normalization is not the most convenient, because the spatial volume V is not relativistically invariant, and therefore
the condition “one-particle per volume V ” is not invariant. We have
already introduced in eq. (4.11) a more convenient Lorentz-invariant
normalization; in a ﬁnite box, using eq. (4.6), it reads
p1 |p2 (R) = 2Ep1 V δp1 ,p2 .

(6.5)

Therefore the diﬀerence between the relativistic and non-relativistic normalization of the one-particle states is
|p (R) = (2Ep V )1/2 |p (N R) ,
and of course for a multiparticle state
 n

(R)
|p1 , . . . , pn
=
(2Epi V )1/2

|p1 , . . . , pn (N R) .

(6.6)

(6.7)

i=1

We denote by Mf i the scattering amplitude between the initial state with
momenta q1 , . . . , qm and the ﬁnal state with momenta p1 , . . . , pn , with
non-relativistic normalization, and by Mf i the same matrix element
with relativistic normalization of the states. Then
Mf i =

n


(2Epi V )−1/2

i=1

m


(2Eqj V )−1/2 Mf i .

(6.8)

j=1

We saw in Chapter 5 that the S-matrix can be written as S = 1 + iT
and that it is convenient to extract a factor (2π)4 δ (4) (Pi − Pf ) from T ,
where Pi and Pf are the total initial and ﬁnal four-momenta. Then
S = 1 + (2π)4 δ (4) (Pi − Pf )iM .

(6.9)

If we take the matrix element of S between the initial state |i and the
ﬁnal state f |, taken with the non-relativistic normalization, then the
matrix element of the operator M is just Mf i while the matrix element
of the identity operator is just a Kronecker delta, because of eq. (6.4),
Sf i = δf i + (2π)4 δ (4) (Pi − Pf )iMf i .

6.2

(6.10)

Decay rates

Consider ﬁrst the case in which the initial state is a single particle with
four-momentum p and mass M , and the ﬁnal state is given by n particles
with four-momenta pi and masses mi , i = 1, . . . n. We are therefore
considering a decay process. Assume for the moment that all particles
are distinguishable.
The rules of quantum mechanics tell us that the probability for this
process is obtained by taking the squared modulus of the amplitude and
summing over all possible ﬁnal states. In eq. (6.10) the term δf i gives
of course zero because the initial and ﬁnal states are diﬀerent. When

6.2

we take the square of the other term we are confronted with the square
of the delta function. To compute it, we recall that we are working in a
ﬁnite spatial volume and, from eq. (4.6),
(2π)3 δ (3) (0) = V .

(6.11)

Similarly, we regularize also the time interval, saying that time runs from
−T /2 to T /2 (at the end of the computation T → ∞) so that
(2π)4 δ (4) (0) = V T

(6.12)

and
|(2π)4 δ (4) (Pi − Pf )iMf i |2 = (2π)4 δ (4) (Pi − Pf ) V T |Mf i |2 .

(6.13)

We must now sum this expression over all ﬁnal states. Since we are
working in a ﬁnite volume V , this is the sum over the possible discrete
values of the momenta of the ﬁnal particles. In the large-volume limit
for each particle we can write, using eq. (4.5)


V
→
d3 pi .
(6.14)
3
(2π)
p
i

It is interesting to understand this result physically, observing that in
statistical mechanics the integration measure over the phase space is
d3 xi d3 pi
(2π)3

(6.15)

for each particle. The factor (2π)3 is simply the volume of the cells of
the phase space, h3 = (2π)3 , in units  = 1. In our case the particles
are momentum eigenstates and are completely delocalized in space, so
the scattering amplitude depends on the momentum but not on the
positions of the particles, and we can integrate over d3 xi , obtaining the
volume factor.
In conclusion, the probability dw for a decay in which in the ﬁnal state
the i-th particle has momentum between pi and pi + dpi is
dw = (2π)4 δ (4) (Pi − Pf ) V T |Mf i |2

n

V d3 pi
i=1

(2π)3

.

(6.16)

This is the probability that the decay takes place at any time between
−T /2 and T /2. We are more interested in the decay rate dΓ, which is
the decay probability per unit time, and therefore is obtained dividing
by T ,
n

V d3 pi
,
(6.17)
dΓ = (2π)4 δ (4) (Pi − Pf ) V |Mf i |2
(2π)3
i=1
and by construction has a ﬁnite limit for T → ∞. To get rid of the
divergent V factors we now express this in terms of the matrix element

Decay rates 157

158 Cross-sections and decay rates

with relativistic normalization. Using eq. (6.8) we see that the volume
factors cancel, and we are left with
dΓ = (2π)4 δ (4) (p −


i

pi )

n

d3 pi
1
,
|Mf i |2
2Ep
(2π)3 (2Ei )
i=1

(6.18)
where Ep is the energy of the initial particle and Ei of the ﬁnal particles.
Various observations are in order:
• Energy–momentum conservation
is guaranteed by the Dirac delta.

In particular, if M < i mi the process is forbidden.
• The factors d3 pi /Ei are relativistically invariant.
• Mf i is computed with the relativistic normalization of the states
and therefore is just the matrix element that we learned to compute
in Chapter 5, and it is relativistically invariant.
• The factor 1/(2Ep ) reduces to 1/(2M ) in the rest frame of the
decaying particle. In a generic frame in which the particle has
speed v, we have Ep = γM with γ = (1 − v 2 )−1/2 and therefore
the rate Γ is smaller by a factor γ. The lifetime of a particle is the
inverse of its total decay rate (i.e. of the rate dΓ integrated over
momenta and summed over all possible decay modes). Therefore
the factor γ is nothing but the relativistic dilatation of time.
It is useful to deﬁne the (diﬀerential) n-body phase space dΦ(n) ,
dΦ(n) ≡ (2π)4 δ (4) (Pi − Pf )

n


d3 pi
.
(2π)3 2Ei
i=1

(6.19)

Equation (6.18) can therefore be written as
dΓ =

1
|Mf i |2 dΦ(n) .
2Ep

(6.20)

Finally, observe that if n of the ﬁnal particles are identical, conﬁgurations
that diﬀer by a permutation are not distinct and therefore the phase
space is reduced by a factor n!.

6.3

Cross-sections

Consider a beam of particles with mass m1 , number density (that is,
number of particles/unit volume) n01 and velocity v1 impinging on a
target made of particles with mass m2 and number density n02 , at rest.
The superscript 0 on n0i is meant to stress that these are the number
densities in a speciﬁc frame, that with particle 2 at rest. Assume for
simplicity that both types of particles have a uniform distribution (it is
not diﬃcult to generalize to a non-uniform distribution, as one can have

6.3

in a typical beam). The number of scattering events, N , that take place
per unit volume and per unit time will be proportional to the incoming
ﬂux n01 v1 and to the density of targets n02 . The proportionality constant
is, by deﬁnition, the cross-section:
dN = σv1 n01 n02 dV dt .

(6.21)

Dimensional analysis shows immediately that σ has the dimensions of
an area. Equation (6.21) holds in the rest frame of the particles of type
2. We want to write a similar expression in a generic frame. First of all,
in a generic frame, we deﬁne the cross-section as the Lorentz invariant
quantity that, in the rest frame of particle 2, is given by eq. (6.21).
The number dN is Lorentz invariant (its integral is the number of clicks
of the detector, so it is clearly independent of the reference frame), and
dV dt = d4 x is also invariant. Therefore we must ﬁnd a Lorentz-invariant
expression that, in the rest frame of particle 2, reduces to v1 n01 n02 . This
is given by (see, e.g. Landau and Lifshitz, vol. II (1979), Section 12)

(6.22)
n1 n2 (v1 − v2 )2 − (v1 × v2 )2 ,
where n1 , n2 are the number densities of the two types of particles in
the frame where their respective velocities are v1 and v2 (note that the
number density is not invariant, but transforms as the inverse of a spatial
volume). If the particles are collinear, we simply have
dN = σ|v1 − v2 |n1 n2 dV dt .
It is convenient to deﬁne the quantity
%

I ≡ (p1 p2 )2 − m21 m22 = E1 E2 (v1 − v2 )2 − (v1 × v2 )2 ,

(6.23)

(6.24)

so that

I
(n1 V )(n2 dV )dt .
(6.25)
V E1 E2
Integrating over dV , n2 dV gives the total number N2 of particles of
type 2, while n1 V = N1 . Then the total number of events per unit
particle of type 1, per unit particle of type 2 in a total time T is given
by σIT /(V E1 E2 ). However, this is nothing but the probability of the
event, i.e. the square of the matrix element, summed over all ﬁnal states.
Therefore

n

V d3 pi
V E1 E2
(2π)4 δ (4) (Pi − Pf ) V T |Mf i |2
σ=
,
(6.26)
IT
(2π)3
i=1
dN = σ

or, in diﬀerential form,
dσ =

n

V 2 E1 E2
V d3 pi
(2π)4 δ (4) (Pi − Pf ) |Mf i |2
.
I
(2π)3
i=1

(6.27)

We now pass from |Mf i |2 to |Mf i |2 . The two initial particles bring a
factor 1/[(2E1 V )(2E2 V )] so the overall factor V 2 E1 E2 cancels, and the

Cross-sections 159

160 Cross-sections and decay rates

n ﬁnal particles bring each one a factor 1/(2Ei V ) so that also the volume
factors in V d3 pi cancel. The ﬁnal result is then
dσ = (2π)4 δ (4) (Pi − Pf )

n

d3 pi
1
|Mf i |2
.
4I
(2π)3 2Ei
i=1

(6.28)

Observe that in the above expression the factors I, Mf i and d3 pi /Ei
are separately Lorentz invariant, so the Lorentz invariance of the crosssection is evident. The term 4I is called the ﬂux factor. In terms of the
phase space (6.19), eq. (6.28) reads
dσ =

6.4

1
|Mf i |2 dΦ(n) .
4I

(6.29)

Two-body ﬁnal states

Consider ﬁrst the decay of a particle of mass M into two particles of
masses m1 , m2 . Since the phase space is Lorentz invariant, we can compute it in the frame that we prefer, and of course the simplest choice is
the rest frame of the initial particle. Then
dΦ(2) = (2π)4 δ(M − E1 − E2 )δ (3) (p1 + p2 )

d3 p2
d3 p1
. (6.30)
3
(2π) 2E1 (2π)3 2E2

We have six integration variables and four Dirac deltas, so we can reduce
this to only two integrations. We can perform explicitly the integration
over d3 p2 using the Dirac delta δ (3) (p1 + p2 ), and we are left with a
phase space which is still diﬀerential with respect to d3 p1 ,
dΦ(2) =

1
1
δ(M − E1 − E2 )d3 p1 .
(2π)2 4E1 E2

(6.31)

Of course here E22 = p22 + m22 where now p2 has become a notation for
−p1 instead of being an independent integration variable. We now write
d3 p1 = p21 dp1 dΩ, where dΩ is the inﬁnitesimal solid angle and p1 = |p1 |,
and we integrate over p1 using the conservation of energy, i.e.


 ∞
%
%
1
1
(2)
2
2
2
2
2
dΩ
p dp1 δ M − p1 + m1 − p1 + m2 .
dΦ =
(2π)2
4E1 E2 1
0
(6.32)
The integral is easily performed using the identity
δ(f (x)) =

1
δ(x − x0 )
|f  (x0 )|

(6.33)

where x0 is the zero of f (x) (if there is more than one zero we must sum
over all of them, but in this case there is only one zero in the integration
domain p1  0 ) and we ﬁnd
1/2
1
dΦ(2) =
dΩ . (6.34)
M 4 + (m21 − m22 )2 − 2M 2 (m21 + m22 )
2
2
32π M

6.4

Two-body ﬁnal states 161

p1

p3

In the limit m1 = m2 ≡ m this simpliﬁes further to
dΦ(2) =

1
32π 2

1−

4m2
dΩ ,
M2

(6.35)

where we have assumed that the two particles are distinguishable. If
instead they are identical, the phase space is reduced by a factor 1/2!.
Another common situation is m1 = m, m2 = 0, in which case


1
m2
dΦ(2) =
1
−
dΩ .
(6.36)
32π 2
M2
Observe that the phase space goes to zero when the decay products have
the maximum mass compatible with the conservation of energy, i.e. at
m = M/2 in eq. (6.35) and at m = M in eq. (6.36). Using eq. (6.20)
we can write the diﬀerential decay rate for a two-body decay, dΓ/dΩ,
where dΩ = d cos θ dφ. In the rest frame of the decaying particle, it is
1/2
1
M 4 + (m21 − m22 )2 − 2M 2 (m21 + m22 )
|Mf i |2 dΩ .
2
3
64π M
(6.37)
In principle, Mf i depends on the angles θ, φ. If the decaying particle
has spin, it is convenient to choose the direction of the spin as the polar
axis. In the absence of external ﬁelds we have cylindrical symmetry
around this axis (the symmetry could be broken, for instance, by an
external magnetic ﬁeld pointing in a direction diﬀerent from the spin
of the particle), and in this case Mf i does not depend on φ and the
integration over dφ simply gives a factor 2π. If furthermore the particle
has spin zero, there is no preferred direction and the decay is isotropic,
i.e. Mf i is independent also of θ, and the integration over dΩ gives
simply a factor 4π.
dΓ =

p1 + p2

Consider now a scattering process 2 → 2. We consider an initial state
with two particles with masses m1 , m2 and four-momenta p1 , p2 , and
a ﬁnal state with two particles with masses m3 , m4 and four-momenta
p3 , p4 . It is useful to introduce the Mandelstam variables s, t and u,
s = (p1 + p2 )2 ,
t = (p1 − p3 )2 ,

p2

p4

Fig. 6.1 An s-channel amplitude.

(6.38)

u = (p1 − p4 )2 .

p

p3

1

These variables are clearly Lorentz invariant, and satisfy the relation
p−p

s + t + u = m21 + m22 + m23 + m24 ,

1

3

(6.39)

as one veriﬁes immediately from the deﬁnitions, using energy–momentum
conservation, p1 + p2 = p3 + p4 .
It is convenient to work in the center of mass (CM), where the incoming particles have four-momenta p1 = (E1 , p) and p2 = (E2 , −p), with
2
E1,2
= p2 + m21,2 . Computing √
s in the CM we ﬁnd s = (E1 + E2 )2 ,
so the center-of-mass energy is s. Observe that in a Feynman graph

p
2

p4

Fig. 6.2 A t-channel amplitude.

162 Cross-sections and decay rates

like Fig. 6.1 the momentum of the intermediate particle is p1 + p2 , so its
propagator is a function of s; for instance, if the intermediate particle
is a scalar with mass m, the propagator in Fig. 6.1 can be written as
i/(s − m2 ). Instead in Fig. 6.2 the propagator of the intermediate particle is i/(t − m2 ). For this reason, the amplitudes in Figs. 6.1 and 6.2
are referred to as the s-channel and t-channel amplitude, respectively.
The u-channel amplitude is obtained exchanging p3 and p4 in Fig. 6.2.
In the CM, we can also write p3 = (E3 , p  ), p4 = (E4 , −p  ). Energy
conservation gives immediately
1/2
1
,
(6.40)
|p | = √ s2 + (m23 − m24 )2 − 2s(m23 + m24 )
2 s
and the same calculation performed in the case of two-body decay gives
dΦ(2) =

|p |
1
√ dΩ .
2
(2π) 4 s

(6.41)

With a simple computation (see the solutions to Exercise 7.1) one can
show that the ﬂux factor I, evaluated in the CM, becomes
√
I = |p| s
(6.42)
and therefore the 2 → 2 diﬀerential scattering cross-section is
dσ =


1
2 |p |
|M
dΩ .
|
f
i
64π 2 s
|p|

(6.43)

For elastic scattering (m1 = m3 , m2 = m4 ) we have |p | = |p| and
dσelas =

1
|Mf i |2 dΩ .
64π 2 s

(6.44)

The above formulas are valid also for particles with spin, if the initial
and ﬁnal spin states are known; in this case the initial state has the
form |i = |p1 , s1 ; . . . ; pn , sn , and similarly for the ﬁnal state, so the
only modiﬁcation in the above equations is that the labels i, f in Mf i
include also the spin degrees of freedom.
However, experimentally it is more common that we do not know the
initial spin conﬁguration and we accept in the detector all ﬁnal spin
conﬁgurations; in this case, to compare with experiment, we must sum
the right-hand side of eq. (6.29) over the ﬁnal spin conﬁgurations and
average it over the initial spin conﬁgurations. Deﬁning


|Mf i |2 ≡
|Mf i |2
(6.45)
initial spins

ﬁnal spins

all formulas for the cross-sections are modiﬁed with the replacement
1
|Mf i |2 ,
(6.46)
|Mf i |2 →
(2sa + 1)(2sb + 1)
where sa , sb are the spins of the two initial particles. For a decay rate Γ
the average over the spin s of the initial particle brings instead a factor
1/(2s + 1).

6.5

6.5

Resonances and the Breit–Wigner distribution 163

Resonances and the Breit–Wigner
distribution

Consider the scattering 2 → 2 in a theory with a cubic interaction vertex,
as for instance in a scalar theory with Lint = λφ3 . At tree level the
amplitude is given by the sum of three Feynman diagrams, the s-channel
amplitude of Fig. 6.1, the t-channel amplitude of Fig. 6.2, and the uchannel amplitude obtained from Fig. 6.2 exchanging p3 with p4 . We
focus on the s-channel amplitude. We denote by m the (renormalized)
mass of the φ ﬁeld and by p = p1 + p2 the total initial four momentum.
Then p2 = (E1 + E2 )2 − (p1 + p2 )2 ≡ s is the square of the CM energy,
and therefore the physical region is deﬁned by
p2 > (2m)2

(6.47)

and in the physical region the propagator i/(p − m ) of the internal line
in Fig. 6.1 is always ﬁnite. In other words, the internal line is oﬀ-shell,
which is also expressed saying that it represents a “virtual” particle,
rather than a real particle.
However, in other situations it is possible to have one or more real
particles in the intermediate state. Consider for instance the theory
described by two light real scalar ﬁelds1 φ1 and φ2 and one heavy scalar
ﬁeld Φ, with Lagrangian
2

2


1
(∂φ1 )2 − m2 φ21 + (∂φ2 )2 − m2 φ22 + (∂Φ)2 − M 2 Φ2 + gφ1 φ2 Φ .
2
(6.48)
The Feynman rules for this theory are very simple. The propagator of
the ﬁelds φi is i/(p2 −m2 ), the propagator of Φ is i/(p2 −M 2 ), and there is
an interaction vertex shown in Fig. 6.3, equal to −ig. After dressing the
propagators with their loop corrections, the masses m and M appearing
in the propagators become the physical, renormalized masses, as we saw
in Chapter 5 (apart from a crucial subtlety to be explained soon). The
φ1 φ2 → φ1 φ2 scattering amplitude in the s-channel is described at tree
level by the diagram in Fig. 6.4, and the Feynman rules give

1

We take two diﬀerent light ﬁelds
φ1 , φ2 to avoid the small complication
of identical particles; we might as well
consider a single light real scalar ﬁeld
φ with coupling φ2 Φ, but we should
be careful to insert a factor 1/2! in the
phase space, because of identical particles, and the appropriate combinatorial
factors in the amplitudes.

L=

iM2→2 = (−ig)2

i
,
p2 − M 2

Fig. 6.3 The vertex for a Φφ1 φ2 interaction. The heavy line is the Φ
ﬁeld and the thin lines represent one
ﬁeld φ1 and one ﬁeld φ2 .

(6.49)

with p2 = s = (p1 +p2 )2 . The physical region corresponds to p2  (2m)2
since each of the two incoming particles have at least an energy equal
to its mass. Therefore, if M 2 < (2m)2 , in the physical region we always
have p2 > M 2 , so p2 − M 2 is always non-zero and the amplitude is ﬁnite.
However, if M 2 > 4m2 , we apparently have a divergent amplitude (and
therefore a divergent cross-section) at a physical value of the energy.
The divergence appears when the momenta of the incoming particles
are such that p2 = M 2 , i.e. when the internal line represents an on-shell
particle. This divergence means that in the case M > 2m the amplitude
(6.49) cannot be correct, and we must have missed something.

Fig. 6.4 The diagram for 2 → 2

scattering in the s-channel.

164 Cross-sections and decay rates

The origin of this unphysical divergence is that we have neglected that,
if M > 2m, the particle described by the ﬁeld Φ is unstable, because it
can decay into two particles of mass m through the graph in Fig. 6.3.
This graph gives an amplitude iMΦ→φ1 φ2 = −ig, independently of the
masses of the particles. However, if M < 2m, the Dirac delta in the
phase space is never satisﬁed and the decay rate is zero. If M > 2m
instead the phase space opens up and we have a non-zero decay rate.
To understand the physics, let us ﬁrst consider what happens when
we have an unstable particle in non-relativistic quantum mechanics (see
Landau and Lifshitz, vol. III (1977), Section 134). When we study
the Schrödinger equation in three spatial dimensions, we obtain real
eigenvalues for the energy operator under the assumption that the wave
function vanishes at inﬁnity. For a decay process, instead, we have an
outgoing spherical wave at inﬁnity, and since this boundary condition
is complex, the eigenvalues of the Hamiltonian are also complex. If we
write them in the form
Γ
(6.50)
E = E0 − i
2
the time-dependence of the wave function is
ψ ∼ e−iEt = e−iE0 t− 2 t .
Γ

Fig. 6.5 The one-loop correction to

the mass of Φ.

(6.51)

Therefore the probability |ψ|2 decays as exp(−Γt) and we see that 1/Γ
is the lifetime, and therefore Γ is just the decay rate discussed in Section 6.2.
The fact that the eigenvalues of the Hamiltonian become complex
when we have an unstable particle must happen also in relativistic quantum theory, and we must be able to read it from the Feynman graphs.
Indeed, when we compute the loop corrections to the squared mass of
the Φ ﬁeld, we ﬁnd that the graph in Fig. 6.5, considered as a function of
M , develops an imaginary part when M > 2m, i.e. above the threshold
for production of two physical particles of mass m in the intermediate
state (see Exercise 6.6). Therefore eq. (6.49) is formally correct, but it
is not true that M is real. Rather, separating the real and imaginary
parts, we have
Γ
(6.52)
M = MR − i ,
2
where MR is the renormalized mass. For the simple Lagrangian that we
have considered, it is straightforward to verify that the imaginary part
of M is indeed equal to −iΓ/2, with Γ the decay rate of the process
Φ → φ1 φ2 . We can just compute explicitly the imaginary part of the
graph in Fig. 6.5 and compare it with the decay rate computed from the
graph in Fig. 6.3, using the general formulas for the decay rate given in
Sections 6.2 and 6.4. The optical theorem states that this is a general
result, and the imaginary part of M is always equal to −Γ/2, where Γ
is the total decay rate (if there are many possible decay channels they
all contribute to the imaginary part).
The case Γ
MR is particularly interesting; this means that the
intermediate particle has a lifetime 1/Γ much bigger than the time that

6.5

Resonances and the Breit–Wigner distribution 165

the light takes to travel a distance equal to its Compton wavelength
1/MR . In this case it makes sense to consider it has a real intermediate
state, which is produced in the collision, lives for some time and then
decays. In this case we call this intermediate particle a resonance. In
this limit we can approximate M 2 = (MR − iΓ/2)2  MR2 − iMR Γ and
the amplitude (6.49) becomes
iM2→2 

−ig 2
,
E 2 − MR2 + iMR Γ

(6.53)

with E the total CM energy. We see that, thanks to the imaginary
contribution, at E = MR the amplitude is no longer divergent. However,
it is much larger than far from the resonance. In fact, when we are far
from the resonance, i.e. when E = cMR with c a numerical constant
not too close to one, the modulus of the amplitude is of order g 2 /MR2 .
Instead, at the resonance, it becomes of order g 2 /MR Γ. Since Γ
MR ,
this is a much bigger value than far from the resonance.
At E  MR we can further approximate E 2 − MR2 = (E − MR )(E +
MR )  2MR (E − MR ) and the amplitude becomes


−ig 2
1
.
(6.54)
iM2→2 
2MR E − MR + i(Γ/2)
We can now compute the elastic cross-section near the resonance, using
eq. (6.44), and observing that the t- and u-channel amplitudes can be
neglected since they are not resonant. Then


g4
1
dσ

.
(6.55)
4
2
dΩ
(16π) MR (E − MR )2 + (Γ2 /4)
The width Γ can also be easily computed explicitly using eq. (6.20) with
iMΦ→φ1 φ2 = −ig and the phase space (6.35). This gives
Γ=

1
g2
2MR 32π 2

1−

4m2
g2
4π
=
M2
16πMR

1−

4m2
.
M2

(6.56)

It is convenient to use this relation to eliminate g in favor of Γ from
eq. (6.55), since Γ is the quantity directly observed, while g can be an
eﬀective coupling of no fundamental signiﬁcance if the resonance is a
bound state of more fundamental components. Integrating the crosssection over dΩ we ﬁnd, at E  MR ,
4π
Γ2
.
(6.57)
MR2 − 4m2 (E − MR )2 + (Γ2 /4)
√
At E = MR , conservation of energy gives MR = 2 m2 + k 2 , where k is
the momentum of the ﬁnal particles in the CM. Therefore MR2 − 4m2 =
4k 2 , and we can rewrite eq. (6.57) as
σ(E) 

σ(E) 

Γ2
π
.
2
|k | (E − MR )2 + (Γ2 /4)

(6.58)

166 Cross-sections and decay rates

This is the Breit–Wigner distribution, when the initial and ﬁnal states
of the process are the same. We can generalize it observing that, if the
initial and ﬁnal states are diﬀerent, the factor Γ2 in the numerator is
replaced by ΓR→i ΓR→f where ΓR→i and ΓR→f are the decay rates of
the resonance R into the initial and ﬁnal states, respectively, simply
because the factor of g 2 in the numerator becomes gRi gRf where gRi is
the eﬀective coupling of the initial state to the resonance R, and gRf
is the eﬀective coupling to the ﬁnal state. Instead the factor Γ2 in the
denominator remains the total decay rate.
For the moment, we have limited ourselves to the case where the
initial and ﬁnal particles, described by φ1 , φ2 , are scalars, and we have
also assumed that the resonance Φ is a scalar. If instead the resonance
has spin J we must sum over the 2J + 1 possible spin states of the
resonance, and we therefore have an overall factor 2J + 1. Furthermore,
if the two initial particles have spin sa and sb , and we know their spin
state, we simply use the partial width ΓR→i for these spin states. If, as
it is more common, we do not know the initial polarizations, we average
over the initial spins inserting a factor

1
.
(2sa + 1)(2sb + 1) s ,s
a

(6.59)

b


We reabsorb sa ,sb in ΓR→i , which therefore becomes the width for
the process R → i summed over all possible spin conﬁgurations of the
state i. Similarly, we sum over the ﬁnal polarizations, reabsorbing the
sum in the redeﬁnition of ΓR→f . In conclusion, the general form of the
Breit–Wigner distribution is

σ(E) 

π
ΓR→i ΓR→f
2J + 1
.
2
(2sa + 1)(2sb + 1) |k | (E − MR )2 + (Γ2 /4)

(6.60)

As an example, consider the scattering
e+ e− → Z 0 → f f¯

(6.61)

where e± are the electron and positron, Z 0 is one of the vector bosons of
the Standard Model, and f, f¯ a fermion–antifermion pair. In this case
sa = sb = 1/2 while J = 1. Since MZ
me , MZ2  4|k |2 and eq. (6.60)
0
gives, for the cross-section at the Z peak,


¯
Γ(Z 0 → e+ e− )Γ(Z 0 → f f)
4π
3
2
2
2 · 2 MZ
ΓZ /4
0
+ −
0
¯
12π Γ(Z → e e )Γ(Z → f f)
.
= 2
2
MZ
ΓZ

σpeak =

(6.62)

6.6

6.6

Born approximation and non-relativistic scattering 167

Born approximation and
non-relativistic scattering

In the non-relativistic limit, the computations performed with the Feynman diagrams must reproduce the results of non-relativistic quantum
mechanics, where the interaction between particles is described by a potential V (x ). The question that we want to answer in this section is the
following: given the ﬁeld theory Lagrangian, what is the potential V (x )
experienced by the particles in the non-relativistic limit?
We begin by recalling the basic formulas of scattering theory in nonrelativistic quantum mechanics (see e.g. Landau and Lifshitz, vol. III
(1977), Section 126): the elastic scattering cross-section for a particle of
mass m in the potential V (x ) has the general form
dσ
= |f (θ)|2 ,
dΩ

(6.63)

where θ is the scattering angle. The scattering amplitude f (θ) can be
computed considering V as a small perturbation of the free Hamiltonian.
The result to ﬁrst order in V is called the Born approximation, and is
given by
f (θ) = −

m
2π



d3 x e−iq ·x V (x ) .

(6.64)

We denote the initial momentum by k , the ﬁnal momentum by k  (with
|k | = |k  | since we consider an elastic process) and the transferred
momentum by q = k  − k . The scattering angle θ is related to q = |q |
and to k = |k | by q = 2k sin(θ/2). In a central potential V (r) the
angular integral in eq. (6.64) is easily performed explicitly, and

2m ∞
f (θ) = −
dr rV (r) sin qr .
(6.65)
q 0
Let us compare these results with the relativistic formalism that we
have developed. For deﬁniteness, we consider the scattering of a nonrelativistic particle of momentum k and mass m, with |k |
m, oﬀ a
m. We can think for instance of an
heavy target A, with mass MA
electron scattering oﬀ an atom. Since k
m
MA , we can neglect
the recoil of the atom. We limit ourselves to elastic scattering.2 We
assume that the incoming particle and the particle A interact through
the exchange of a massless or massive boson; it would be a photon in the
electron–atom case, but we can treat similarly the exchange of a massive
vector particle, or of a scalar particle. At tree level, the interaction is
described by the Feynman diagram in Fig. 6.6a. The fact that we neglect
the recoil of the scattering center is represented writing the Feynman
diagram as in Fig. 6.6b.3

2

The case where the atom is left in an
excited state, and therefore the collision
is inelastic, is discussed in Problem 6.2.

3

We are considering a theory in
which there is a (light particle)–(light
particle)–boson vertex and a (heavy
particle)–(heavy particle)–boson vertex, but no (light particle)–(heavy
particle)–boson vertex, so there are no
s-channel and u-channel amplitudes,
but only the t-channel amplitude of
Fig. 6.6a.

168 Cross-sections and decay rates

Fig. 6.6 (a): the scattering of a light
particle oﬀ a heavy target. In the
limit in which we neglect the recoil
of the target, the graph is drawn as
in Fig. (b), which represents more
generally the scattering of a particle
in an external potential.

(a)

(b)

We start from our basic formula for elastic scattering, eq. (6.44). By
assumption MA is much larger than the electron energy, so s  MA2 and
eq. (6.44) becomes
dσelas 

1
|Mf i |2 dΩ .
64π 2 MA2

(6.66)

Since we want to compare with the non-relativistic equations, it is convenient to use the non-relativistic normalization of the matrix element.
We denote by |k , A a state with an electron with momentum k and
the atom in a state labeled by A. According to eq. (6.7) we have
|k , A (R) = (2Ek )1/2 (2EA )1/2 |k , A (N R)  (2m)1/2 (2MA )1/2 |k , A (N R) .
(6.67)
We work in the rest frame of the atom, so EA = MA , and we have
used the fact that the incoming particle is non-relativistic, so Ek  m.
For notational convenience we have also set the spatial volume V equal
to one, since we have already checked explicitly in Section 6.1 that the
volume factors cancel in the ﬁnal expression for the cross-section. As in
Section 6.1, we denote by Mf i the matrix element with non-relativistic
normalization. Then, from eq. (6.67),
Mf i = (k  , A|Tf i |k , A )(R)  (2m)(2MA ) Mf i ,
and eq. (6.66) becomes

4

Comparing the cross-sections, the relative phase between f (θ) and Mf i
remains undetermined. The correct
phase is a plus sign, as we have written,
and can be found either comparing directly the amplitudes, or checking that
in this way one obtains the Coulomb
potential with the correct sign, as we
will do below.

(6.68)

 m 2
dσelas

|Mf i |2 .
(6.69)
dΩ
2π
Comparing with eqs. (6.63) and (6.64) we see that we can identify the
non-relativistic scattering amplitude f (θ) with (m/2π)Mf i .4
We therefore arrive at the following conclusion. The interaction potential is an intrinsically non-relativistic concept, since it describes an
instantaneous (rather than a retarded) interaction. In QFT, in the fully
relativistic regime, it makes no sense. However, in the non-relativistic
limit, it is recovered with the following procedure: 1) Compute the
scattering amplitude Mf i using the Feynman diagrams. 2) Transform
it into the amplitude with non-relativistic normalization of the states,
Mf i . This is related to the non-relativistic scattering amplitude f (θ) by
Mf i = (2π/m)f (θ). Using eq. (6.64),

Mf i (q ) = − d3 x e−iq ·x V (x ) ,
(6.70)

6.6

Born approximation and non-relativistic scattering 169

or, inverting the Fourier transform,

d3 q
V (x ) = −
Mf i (q )eiq ·x .
(2π)3

(6.71)

We apply this formula to the electromagnetic scattering of an electron
with charge e oﬀ a positively charged ion with charge −Ze and spin
1/2, and we consider the case where the initial and ﬁnal spin states are
equal, so we will not write the spin labels explicitly. The vertex factor
associated to the electron is −ieγ ν while the vertex associated to the ion
is +iZeγ µ . Therefore the Feynman diagram of Fig. 6.6a gives
iMf i = [ūA (+iZeγ µ )uA ]

−iηµν
[ūe (−ieγ ν )ue ] ,
q2

(6.72)

where uA is the wave function of the ion and ue of the electron. The
momentum transferred by the photon is q µ = (q 0 , q ) and, since we are
considering elastic scattering, we have q 0 = 0 and q 2 = −q 2 . Then
Mf i =

Ze2
(ūA γ µ uA ) (ūe γµ ue ) .
q2

(6.73)

Since the particle A is at rest, it is convenient to use the standard representation for the γ matrices, as discussed in Sections 3.4.2
√ and 3.6.
For a particle with mass MA at rest we found uL = uR = MA ξ, with
ξ † ξ = 1, see eq. (3.103). As we found in eq. (3.95), the spinor in the
standard representation is given in terms of uL , uR by


1
uR + uL
u= √
,
(6.74)
uR − uL
2
so, for the particle A at rest,

 

ξ
uA = 2MA
.
0

(6.75)

Then ūA γ 0 uA = u†A uA = 2MA ξ † ξ = 2MA and, from the form of the γ
matrices in the standard representation, eq. (3.96), ūA γ i uA = 0. Therefore


(6.76)
(ūA γ µ uA ) (ūe γµ ue ) = ūA γ 0 uA (ūe γ0 ue )  (2MA )(2me ) ,
where we have set ūe γ0 ue  2me since the electron is non-relativistic.
We see that the contribution of the wave functions on the external lines
is just what is needed to convert Mf i into Mf i , and we ﬁnd
Mf i (q ) =

Ze2
.
q2

(6.77)

Using eq. (6.71) and performing the angular integration similarly to
eq. (6.65), the potential is therefore given by

 ∞
d3 q
4π
iq ·x
V (x ) = −
Mf i (q )e
=−
dq qMf i (q) sin qr ,
(2π)3
(2π)3 r 0
(6.78)

170 Cross-sections and decay rates

where here we have used the notation q = |q |. The integral is performed
∞
using the identity 0 dx (sin x)/x = π/2, and we ﬁnally ﬁnd
Zα
,
(6.79)
r
which is the standard Coulomb potential. The same calculation can be
performed if we consider the exchange of a massive boson of mass µ.
The result is now proportional to the Fourier transform of the massive
propagator.5 For elastic scattering we have q 0 = 0 and therefore q 2 =
(q 0 )2 − q 2 = −q 2 , so
V (r) = −

5
Actually, in the case of a massive
gauge boson the propagator is not
proportional to ηµν but to ηµν −
(qµ qν /m2 ), see eq. (8.26). The reader
can verify that the additional term
qµ qν /m2 in our case gives zero since
q = p − p and then qµ ū(p )γ µ u(p) =
0, using the fact that the spinors
u(p), ū(p ) are solutions of the Dirac
equation.

1
q 2 − µ2

=−

1
q 2 + µ2

.

Therefore the r-dependence of the potential is now given by

1
e−µr
d3 q
.
eiq x ∼
3
2
2
(2π) q + µ
r

(6.80)

(6.81)

A potential of this form is called a Yukawa potential. This is a shortrange potential, with a characteristic interaction range equal to the
Compton wavelength 1/µ of the particle exchanged. We conclude that:
exchange of a massless boson ↔ long-range Coulomb potential
exchange of a massive boson ↔ short-range Yukawa potential.
As for the sign of the potential, we have seen that in the case of
the exchange of a vector boson only the component µ = ν = 0 of the
propagator contributes, because in the non-relativistic limit only the
µ = 0 component survives in ūγ µ u. Therefore the factor coming from
the propagator is
−iη00
i
D00 = 2
=+ 2
.
(6.82)
q − µ2
|q | + µ2
For the exchange of a scalar particle instead the factor coming from the
propagator is
i
i
=− 2
.
(6.83)
D= 2
2
q −µ
|q | + µ2
The interaction mediated by a vector particle is repulsive for particles
with the same charge and attractive for particles with opposite charge, as
we have checked in the computation above. We see comparing eqs. (6.82)
and (6.83) that the interaction mediated by a scalar particle is instead
attractive for particles with the same charge. In fact, the strong interaction between nucleons, at distances larger than the fermi, can be thought
of as mediated by the pion, which is scalar and massive, and therefore
the strong interaction between nucleons is attractive, and short-ranged.
More complicated potentials can be obtained with the simultaneous
exchange of more than one boson. For instance, in the language of
Feynman diagrams, van der Waals forces at large distances arise from the
exchange of two photons between atoms which are electrically neutral
but have an electric dipole moment, see Landau and Lifshitz, vol. IV
(1982), Section 85.

6.7

6.7

Solved problems

Problem 6.1. Three-body kinematics and phase space
In this problem we investigate various aspects of the kinematics of three-body
ﬁnal states. Consider the decay of a particle with four-momentum p in its rest
frame, with p = (M, 0), into three particles with momenta pi and masses mi ,
i = 1, 2, 3. Let E1 , E2 , E3 be the energies of the decay products in the rest
frame of the decaying particle. The diﬀerential three-body phase space is
dΦ(3) =

d3 p 1
d3 p 2
d3 p 3
(2π)4 δ (4) (p1 + p2 + p3 − p) ,
(2π)3 2E1 (2π)3 2E2 (2π)3 2E3

(6.84)

where Ei2 = p2i + m2i . The Dirac delta can be used to integrate over the spatial
momentum p3 , so that
dΦ(3) =

1 d3 p 1 d3 p 2
δ(E1 + E2 + E3 − M ) ,
8(2π)5 E1 E2 E3

(6.85)

where E3 = (p23 + m23 )1/2 and now p3 is a notation for −(p1 + p2 ). The matrix
elements |Mf i |2 must be integrated with this measure. To proceed further,
we must know the dependence of |Mf i |2 on p1 , p2 . The simplest case is the
decay of a spin-0 particle into spin-0 particles, in the absence of external ﬁelds.
In this case there is no preferred direction in space, and the matrix element
can only depend on the angle θ between p1 and p2 . Then eq. (6.85) becomes
1 4πp21 dp1
2πp22 dp2 dcos θ δ(E1 + E2 + E3 − M )
(6.86)
8(2π)5 E1 E2 E3
1
p1 dp1
=
(p2 dp2 ) (p1 p2 dcos θ) δ(E1 + E2 + E3 − M ) .
32π 3 E1 E2 E3

dΦ(3) =

Now we use the identity E1 dE1 = p1 dp1 , which follows from E12 = p21 + m21 ,
and similarly E2 dE2 = p2 dp2 . Furthermore,
E32 = (p1 + p2 )2 + m23 = p21 + p22 + 2p1 p2 cos θ + m23 .

(6.87)

Therefore, at p1 , p2 ﬁxed, we have E3 dE3 = p1 p2 dcos θ. In eq. (6.86) it is then
convenient to perform the integration in d cos θ as the innermost, so we can
rewrite eq. (6.86) as
1
dE1 dE2 dE3 δ(E1 + E2 + E3 − M ) ,
(6.88)
32π 3
and use the Dirac delta to eliminate E3 . In conclusion, for spin-0 particles,
and in the absence of external ﬁelds,
dΦ(3) =

dΦ(3) =

1
dE1 dE2 .
32π 3

(6.89)

Of course this expression is valid only in the region of the (E1 , E2 ) plane where
energy–momentum conservation is satisﬁed, otherwise the Dirac delta gives
zero. To determine this region, we ﬁrst introduce the Mandelstam variables
s, t, u for the decay of a particle with four-momentum p into three particles
with four-momenta p1 , p2 , p3 ,
s = (p − p1 )2 = (p2 + p3 )2 ,

(6.90)

t = (p − p2 )2 = (p1 + p3 )2 ,

(6.91)

u = (p − p3 )2 = (p1 + p2 )2 .

(6.92)

Solved problems 171

172 Cross-sections and decay rates
These variables are Lorentz invariant by deﬁnition, and can be written in
terms of the center-of-mass energies E1 , E2 , E3 as
s = M 2 + m21 − 2M E1 ,

t

2

2

s+t=M +m

t = M + m22 − 2M E2 ,
u = M 2 + m23 − 2M E3 .

2

s t = M2m 2

(6.93)
(6.94)
(6.95)

s is also called the invariant mass of the (2, 3) pair, and is denoted also as
m223 , and similarly t = m213 and u = m212 . From E1 + E2 + E3 = M it follows
that
(6.96)
s + t + u = M 2 + m21 + m22 + m23 .

s
Fig. 6.7 The allowed region of phase

space (shaded area) when two ﬁnal
particles are massless.

Therefore the three Mandelstam variables are not independent. We choose s
and t as the independent variables. Since ds = −2M dE1 and dt = −2M dE2 ,
the phase space can be rewritten as
dΦ(3) =

t
s+t=M

2

s
Fig. 6.8 The Dalitz plot when all

three ﬁnal particles are massless becomes a triangle.

dsdt
.
16M 2 (2π)3

(6.97)

We now ﬁnd the kinematical limits on s, t. First of all s attains its maximum
value when E1 has its minimum value, see eq. (6.93), i.e. when E1 = m1 , so
smax = (M − m1 )2 . This corresponds to the conﬁguration in which, in the
rest frame of the decaying particle, the initial particle decays into particle 1
at rest, while particles 2 and 3 have opposite momenta, with the modulus of
momentum ﬁxed by energy conservation.
The minimum value of s is found instead writing s = (p2 + p3 )2 = m22 +
2
m3 + 2(E2 E3 − p2 · p3 ). Since s is invariant, we can compute it in the frame
that we prefer. In the CM of the pair (2, 3) we have p3 = −p2 , and in this
frame s = m22 + m23 + 2(E2 E3 + |p2 | · |p3 |), which shows that the minimum
value is obtained, in this frame, for p2 = p3 = 0, so that E2 = m2 , E3 = m3 ,
and s = (m2 + m3 )2 . Since s is Lorentz invariant, this is the minimum value
in any frame. In conclusion, the limits on s are

t

(m2 + m3 )2  s  (M − m1 )2 .

(6.98)

Now, ﬁxing s within these limits, we look for the limits on t. We therefore
look for a relation which expresses the conservation of energy and momentum
and which is written only in terms of s and t. We start from E32 = p23 + m23
and we use the conservation of energy, E3 = M − E1 − E2 and of momentum,
p3 = −p1 − p2 , to write

s

(M − E1 − E2 )2 = m23 + p 21 + p 22 + 2p1 · p2 .
The limiting cases correspond to

Fig. 6.9 The generic form of the

Dalitz plot when all three ﬁnal particles are massive.

p1 · p2 = ±|p1 | · |p2 | = ±

q
(E12 − m21 )(E22 − m22 ) .

(6.99)

(6.100)

Inserting this into eq. (6.99), we ﬁnd that the limiting curve in the (s, t) plane
is given by
q
M 2 + 2E1 E2 + m21 + m22 − m23 − 2M (E1 + E2 ) = ±2 (E12 − m21 )(E22 − m22 ) .
(6.101)
Using eqs. (6.93) and (6.94) we can eliminate E1 , E2 in favor of s, t,
E1 =

M 2 + m21 − s
,
2M

E2 =

M 2 + m22 − t
.
2M

(6.102)

6.7
We examine ﬁrst this curve in the limiting case m1 = m2 = 0 (we then denote
m3 simply by m). The curve with the plus sign becomes simply t+s = M 2 +m2
while that with the minus sign becomes st = m2 M 2 . If m = 0, the resulting
region of the (s, t) plane is shown in Fig. 6.7, while if even m = 0 the area
degenerates to a triangle, see Fig. 6.8. The plot of the phase space region
allowed by energy–momentum conservation is known as the Dalitz plot. If all
three masses are diﬀerent from zero the Dalitz plot has the generic form shown
in Fig. 6.9. Observe that the number of cusps in the limiting curve is equal
to the number of massless ﬁnal particles.
The usefulness of this representation is that the phase space is uniform in the
Dalitz plot, see eq. (6.97), and therefore any non-uniformity in the distribution
of events is due to the matrix element. This allows us to identify immediately
possible resonances. Suppose for instance that the decay of the initial particle
proceeds through an intermediate resonance that subsequently decays into
particles 2 and 3 as in Fig. 6.10. As we saw in Section
6.5, the process will
√
be greatly enhanced when the kinematic invariant s (i.e. the invariant mass
m23 of the (2, 3) pair) is equal to the mass mR of the resonance. Therefore
the distribution of the experimental events will be mostly localized in a band
corresponding to this value of m23 , rather than being distributed more or
less uniformly over the whole Dalitz plot, and it might look as in Fig. 6.11.
This is the way in which many resonances are discovered. For example, the
D0 meson is a particle with mass mD = 1864.6 ± 0.5 MeV, spin zero and a
lifetime τ = (410.3±1.5)×10−15 s. Among its decay modes, one ﬁnds a threebody decay D0 → K − π + π 0 . Displaying the various events collected by the
detector on a Dalitz plot, one ﬁnds a band of the type shown in Fig. 6.11 when
on the horizontal axis we plot the invariant mass of the K − π + system, and
the band is localized at m2K − π+  (892 MeV)2 . This shows that the process
goes through a resonance, known as K ∗ (892)0 , i.e. D0 → K ∗ (892)0 π 0 and
subsequently K ∗ (892)0 → K − π + .
The same considerations can be applied to a scattering process of two particles into three particles. In this case the initial state, in the CM, has fourmomentum p = (ECM , 0), where ECM is the total energy in the CM, and all
considerations above go through with the replacement M → ECM . So, for
instance, in the scattering process of kaons on protons, K − p → Λ0 π + π − , with
the kaon momentum of the order of the GeV and the protons at rest, one
ﬁnds that the events are concentrated in two bands, as in Fig. 6.12, corresponding to the two processes K − p → Σ+ π − , followed by Σ+ → Λ0 π + , and
K − p → Σ− π + , followed by Σ− → Λ0 π − .
Problem 6.2.
atoms

Solved problems 173

3

2
1

Fig. 6.10 A three-particle decay go-

ing through a resonant intermediate
state.

t

mR2

s

Fig. 6.11 If the three-body decays

proceed through a resonance of mass
mR , the experimental events are
concentrated on a band around s =
m2R , of width equal to the resonance
width, rather than being distributed
more or less uniformly in the Dalitz
plot.
m2
Σ

m2 −
Λπ

Inelastic scattering of non-relativistic electrons on

In this problem we study the process in which a non-relativistic electron scatters on an atom A, leaving the atom in an excited state A∗ , i.e. e− A → e− A∗ .
We start from eq. (6.43) for the inelastic cross-section. We work in the rest
frame of the atom A, and we denote its mass by MA . As in Section 6.6, we
2
, since the mass of the atom A is much bigger than the electron
use s  MA
energy. We use the matrix element with non-relativistic normalization, see
eq. (6.8), and therefore eq. (6.43) becomes
“ m ”2 p 
dσ
=
|Mf i |2 .
dΩ
2π
p

(6.103)

We use the notation p = |p|, p = |p |. We saw in Section 6.6 that, for elastic

m2

Λ π+

m2

Σ

Fig. 6.12 The distribution of events

in K − p → Λ0 π + π − , showing that
the process goes through the resonances Σ± .

174 Cross-sections and decay rates
Z

scattering,
Mf i (q ) = −

d3 x e−iq ·x V (x ) = − p  |V̂ |p  ,

(6.104)

where the hat denotes the quantum operator, and |p , |p   are the incoming
and outgoing electron states with non-relativistic normalization, so x |p  =
eip·x , and q = p  − p . We set all volume factors equal to one for simplicity,
since they cancel anyhow at the end. The last equality in eq. (6.104) is easily
proved inserting two complete sets of states,
Z
(6.105)
p  |V̂ |p  = d3 xd3 x p  |x   x  |V̂ |x  x |p  ,
and using x  |V̂ |x  = V (x ) x  |x  = V (x )δ (3) (x − x  ). In eq. (6.104) the
atom is treated as an external scattering center, without internal dynamics. If
we take into account the fact that the internal state of the atom changes, we
must insert in the initial and ﬁnal state also the atomic state, so for inelastic
scattering eq. (6.104) must be replaced by
Mf i = − p  A∗ |V̂ |p A .

(6.106)

For simplicity, we limit ourselves to the Coulomb interaction of the incoming
electrons with the atomic electrons and with the nucleus, neglecting all spin
interactions, and the form factor of the nucleus. Then
!
Z
X
Z
1
−
V̂ (x , x a ) = −α
,
(6.107)
|x | a=1 |x − x a |
where x is the position operator of the incoming electron, x a of the atomic
electrons, and we have considered a neutral atom with Z electrons. The wave

function of the incoming electron is eip ·x and of the outgoing electron is eip ·x .
Therefore, with q = p  − p , the matrix element (6.106) becomes
Z
Mf i = − d3 x e−iq ·x A∗ |V̂ (x , x a )|A
#
"
Z
Z
X
1
Z
3
−iq ·x
∗
∗
= +α d x e
A |A −
|A . (6.108)
A |
|x |
|x − x a |
a=1
We now observe that
Z
d3 x e−iq ·x
and we use

1
= e−iq ·x a
|x − x a |
Z

Z

d3 x e−iq ·x

1
|x |

(6.109)

4π
1
=
(6.110)
|x |
|q |2
(this equality can be proved more easily adding a factor e− |x | in the integrand,
to assure the convergence; in polar coordinates the integral is then elementary,
and at the end we take the limit → 0+ ). Therefore
#
"
Z
X
4πα
∗ −iq ·x a
∗
|A ,
(6.111)
A |e
Mf i = 2 Z A |A −
q
a=1
d3 x e−iq ·x

where q = |q |. We now perform a multipole expansion, expanding e−iq ·x a ,
and we retain terms up to quadratic order. The expansion is valid when
qa  1, where a is the atomic size. Then
#
"
Z
Z
X
4πα
1 i j ∗ X i j
i
∗
i
3
xa |A + q q A |
xa xa |A + O(q ) , (6.112)
Mf i = 2 iq A |
q
2
a=1
a=1

6.7

Solved problems 175

where in xia the index a labels the atomic electrons, while i = 1, 2, 3 is the
spatial index. We introduce the dipole and the quadrupole operators
Di =

Z
X

xia ,

(6.113)

a=1

Qij =

«
Z „
X
1
xia xja − δ ij ra2 ,
3
a=1

(6.114)

with ra = |x a |. Then
#
"
4πα 1 2 ∗ X 2
1 i j ∗ ij
i
∗
i
3
Mf i = 2
q A |
ra |A + iq A |D |A + q q A |Q |A + O(q ) .
q
6
2
a
(6.115)
When we take the modulus squared of this amplitude, there is no interference
between the dipole and the other two terms (the scalar term ∼ r 2 and the
quadrupole), since the dipole contributes only to transitions which change
the parity, while both the scalar and the quadrupole are non-vanishing only
between states with the same parity.6 Let us denote more explicitly |A =
|nLM , where L is the orbital angular momentum, M = Lz , and n denotes
collectively all the other quantum numbers, e.g. n is the principal quantum
number in the hydrogen atom. Observe that, since we are neglecting the spin–
orbit coupling, L is separately conserved. Similarly, we write |A∗  = |n L M  .
Putting together eqs. (6.103) and (6.115), and taking into account that the
interference term involving the dipole vanishes, the cross-section is the sum of
an even-parity term and the dipole term,
˛
˛2
«
„
˛
˛
p 2 2 ˛ 1    X 2
q i q j    ij
dσ
˛
= m α ˛ nLM |
ra |nLM  + 2 n L M |Q |nLM ˛ ,
˛3
˛
dΩ even
p
q
a
(6.116)
„
«
p 4m2 α2 i j    i
dσ
=
q q n L M |D |nLM  nLM |Dj |n L M   . (6.117)
dΩ dipole
p
q4
These expressions can be simpliﬁed observing that typically we do not know
the value of M before the transition and we are not interested in a speciﬁc value
of M  after. Therefore in the cross-section we average over the initial value of
M and we sum over the ﬁnal values. Summing over M , the interference term
between the
P scalar and quadrupole in eq. (6.116) disappears. In fact, the scalar
operator a ra2 has non-vanishing matrix elements only if M = M  , L = L ,
and its matrix element is independent of M . Therefore the M -dependence in
the interference term is completely contained in n LM |Qij |nLM . Summing
over M , we ﬁnd
L
X
n LM |Qij |nLM  = 0 .
(6.118)
M =−L

This could be shown by explicit computation, but it is much easier to observe
that n LM |Qij |nLM  is a spatial tensor with two indices; before performing
the sum over M , we have at our disposal the tensor δ ij , and the direction ni
of the quantization axis, so the result will be a combination of δ ij and ni nj .
After we sum over M , any dependence on the direction of the quantization axis
disappears, and the result can depend only on δ ij . However, Qij is a traceless
tensor, and therefore the left-hand side of eq. (6.118) cannot be proportional
to δ ij . This means that it must vanish.

6

The angular momentum selection
rules instead are as follows: the dipole
is a vector, and as such it could mediate transitions with ∆L = 0, ±1. However parity eliminates ∆L = 0, since xi
is a true vector, and we are left with
∆L = ±1. Similarly the quadrupole
is a spin-2 operator and can mediate
transitions with ∆L = 0, ±2, whereas
∆L = ±1 are eliminated by parity. The
scalar r 2 of course mediates only transitions with ∆L = 0, ∆M = 0. Therefore
in a transition with ∆L = 0, ∆M = 0
the scalar and quadrupole can interfere.

176 Cross-sections and decay rates
Therefore the cross-section splits into a sum of scalar, dipole and quadrupole
terms,
«
„
X 2
p m2 α2
dσ
=
ra |nLM |2 δLL δM M  ,
(6.119)
| n LM |
dΩ scalar
p
9
a
„

„

dσ
dΩ
dσ
dΩ

«
=
dipole

p 4m2 α2 q i q j X    i
n L M |D |nLM  nLM |Dj |n L M   ,
p
q 4 2L + 1

M,M

(6.120)
p m2 α2 q i q j q k q l X    ij
kl  
n L M |Q |nLM  nLM |Q |n L M   .
=
4
p
q
2L
+
1
quad


«

M,M

(6.121)
Performing the sum over M, M  allows us to simplify further the dipole and
quadrupole cross-sections. Again we use the fact that the choice of the quantization axis becomes irrelevant and there is no preferred direction. Therefore,
in the dipole cross-section, the quantity
X    i
n L M |D |nLM  nLM |Dj |n L M  
M,M 

must be proportional to δ ij , since it is a tensor and there is no other quantity
that can appear in the ﬁnal result. We denote the proportionality constant
by D2 /3,
X

n L M  |Di |nLM  nLM |Dj |n L M   =

M,M 

1 ij 2
δ D ,
3

(6.122)

P
so that by deﬁnition D2 = M,M  | n L M  |Di |nLM |2 . In order to simplify
the quadrupole term we introduce the notation
X    ij
n L M |Q |nLM  nLM |Qkl |n L M   .
(6.123)
T ijkl =
M,M 

The advantage of summing over M, M  is that even the apparently complicated tensor structure of T ijkl is fully determined by symmetry considerations.
Again, we use the fact that T ijkl is a tensor and δ ij is the only tensor at our
disposal, since we have no preferred direction (it is easy to see that ijk cannot enter, both because of parity and because it is impossible to use it to
construct a tensor with the symmetry properties of T ijkl ). Therefore we must
have T ijkl = c1 δ ij δ kl + c2 δ ik δ jl + c3 δ il δ jk . Since Qij = Qji , T ijkl must satisfy
T ijkl = T jikl , and similarly for the second pair of indices. This implies that,
ijkl
∼ δ ik δ jl + δ il δ jkP− cδ ij δ kl . The constant
apart from an overall constant,
P iiT
iikl
= 0. This gives
c is ﬁxed observing that i Q = 0 and therefore
iT
c = 2/3. Deﬁning
X ijij
Q2 =
T
,
(6.124)
i,j

we therefore have
T ijkl =

Q2
10

„
δ ik δ jl + δ il δ jk −

2 ij kl
δ δ
3

«
.

(6.125)

(The factor 1/10 comes contracting i with k and j with l in the above equation.) In conclusion, all the information about the atomic structure has been
condensed in just D2 for dipole transitions and Q2 for quadrupole transitions.

6.7
Inserting eqs. (6.122) and (6.125) into eqs. (6.120) and (6.121), respectively,
we ﬁnd
«
„
1
m2 α2 D2
dσ
p 4
,
(6.126)
=
dΩ dipole
p 3 2L + 1
q2
«
„
dσ
p 2
1
=
(6.127)
m2 α2 Q2 .
dΩ quad
p 15 2L + 1
The total cross-section is obtained integrating over dΩ. The angular dependence is hidden in the transferred momentum q while p is ﬁxed by the conservation of energy. Therefore the quadrupole cross-section, which is independent
of q, simply gets a factor of 4π after integration over dΩ. For the dipole crosssection we observe that, since q = p  − p , we have
q 2 = p + p2 − 2pp cos θ ,

(6.128)

qdq = −pp d cos θ .

(6.129)

2

and therefore

and the limits on q are qmin = p − p (we are considering excitations of the
atom due to the collision, so p > p ) and qmax = p + p . Then
«
„
Z
dσ
σdipole = dΩ
dΩ dipole
„
«
Z p+p
1 dσ
= 2π
q dq
pp dΩ dipole
p−p
=

8π
p + p
1
m2 α2 D2
log
.
2
3 2L + 1
p
p − p

(6.130)

Summary of chapter
• The calculation of scattering cross-sections and of decay rates is
made of two parts: (1) The dynamical part, which is the computation of the matrix element Mf i . When a perturbative approach
is applicable, Mf i can be computed using the Feynman diagram
technique discussed in Chapter 5; (2) The kinematical part, i.e.
the summation over the ﬁnal states, with the appropriate factors
for the initial state.
• The kinematics of the ﬁnal state is contained in the phase space,
eq. (6.19). The basic equation for computing the decay width of a
particle is eq. (6.20), while scattering cross-sections are computed
using eqs. (6.29) and (6.24). Explicit formulas for two-body and
three-body ﬁnal states are given in Section 6.4 and in Problem 6.1.
• When the values of the initial momenta are such that an internal line becomes on-shell, the cross-section is enhanced. In this
case the intermediate state can be seen as a real particle which is
formed, lives for a certain time, and then decays. Such a particle
is called a resonance. The resonant cross-section is described by
the Breit–Wigner distribution, eq. (6.60).

Solved problems 177

178 Cross-sections and decay rates

Further reading
• Many useful results on the topics of this chapter
can be found in the old but still beautiful series
of books by Landau and Lifshitz. For the deﬁnition of cross-sections, decay rates, phase space, etc.
see vol. II (Classical Field Theory), Section 12 and
vol. IV (Relativistic Field Theory), Section 65. For
resonances in non-relativistic quantum mechanics
see vol. III (Quantum Mechanics), Section 134. For
emission of radiations by atoms or molecules, dif-

fusion of light, interactions between electrons and
between atoms with Feynman diagram techniques,
Chapters 5, 6, 9 and 10 of Landau and Lifshitz,
vol. IV (1982) give an unmatched source of explicit
calculations.
• A rich source of solved problems in particle physics
and ﬁeld theory, including many examples of calculations of scattering processes, decays, etc., is
Di Giacomo, Paﬀuti and Rossi (1994).

Exercises
(6.1) Consider the diﬀerential cross-section for the 2 → 2
scattering, given in eq. (6.43). Show that it can be
rewritten, in terms of the Mandelstam variable t
and of the ﬂux factor I, as
1
|Mf i |2 dt .
(6.131)
dσ =
64πI 2
Observe that all factors are explicitly Lorentz invariant. (Assume cylindrical symmetry to perform
the integration over dφ.)
(6.2) Consider a 2 → 2 elastic scattering process for two
particles of masses m1 and m2 . In the CM, let p  be
the ﬁnal momentum of the particle 1, E  its energy,
v2 the modulus of the initial velocity of the particle
2, and θ the scattering angle. Perform the Lorentz
transformation to the laboratory frame, where the
particle 2 is initially at rest and check that the ﬁnal
energy of the particle 1, in the lab frame, is
Elab = γ2 (E  + v2 |p  | cos θ)

Emin = γ2 (E  − v2 |p  |)
Emax = γ2 (E  + v2 |p  |) .

(6.133)

Use this to show that the two-body phase space can
be rewritten as
1
√ dElab
(6.134)
dΦ(2) =
8πγ2 v2 s
√
where s is the center of mass energy, and we assumed cylindrical symmetry around the beam axis.

(6.135)

(6.3) (i) Consider the decay of an excited atomic state
A∗ into a lower state A, with emission of a photon, A∗ → Aγ. Verify that the phase space can be
written as
dΦ(2) =

ω
dΩ ,
16π 2 MA

(6.136)

where ω is the energy of the photon and MA the
mass of the atom.
(ii) Verify that the decay width can be written as
dΓ = |Mf i |2

(6.132)

with γ2 = (1 − v22 )−1/2 , and therefore
dElab = γ2 v2 |p  | d cos θ .

The two-body phase space is therefore uniform with
respect to the lab energy Elab , between the kinematical limits Emin  Elab  Emax , with

ω
dΩ ,
8π 2

(6.137)

where Mf i is the matrix element with the normalization of one particle per unit volume for the
atomic states.
(iii) Consider a scattering process Aγ → A∗ γ  .
Show that
dσ =

1 ω
|Mf i |2 dΩ ,
16π 2 ω

(6.138)

where ω, ω  are the energy of the initial and ﬁnal
photon, respectively.

Exercises 179
(6.4) Consider a two-photon decay of an atomic state,
A∗ → Aγ1 γ2 . Show that the decay width can be
written as
Z
1
dΓ
=
ω
(ω
−
ω
)
dΩ1 dΩ2 |Mf i |2 ,
1
1
dω1
8(2π)5
(6.139)
where ω1 , ω2 are the energies of the two photons,
ω = EA∗ − EA = ω1 + ω2 , and dΩ1 , dΩ2 are the
solid angles of the two photons.
(6.5) Denote by dΦ(n) (P ; p1 , . . . , pn ) the n-body phase
space, with p1 + . . . pn = P . Show that
dΦ(n) (P ; p1 , . . . , pn ) =

Z ∞

dµ2
2π

0
(n−j+1)

×dΦ(j) (q; p1 , . . . , pj )dΦ

(6.140)

(P ; pj+1 , . . . , pn , q),

where µ2 = q02 − q 2 . Discuss the physical meaning
of this recursive representation of the phase space.
(6.6) (i) In the theory with Lagrangian given in
eq. (6.48), show that the Feynman diagram in
Fig. 6.5 develops an imaginary part when M > 2m,
and compute it.
(ii) Denoting the result of the Feynman diagram
of Fig. 6.5 by iM, show that eq. (6.52) predicts
that the decay rate Γ for the process Φ → φ1 φ2 is
related to M by
Γ=

1
ImM .
MR

(6.141)

(iii) Verify the correctness of the above relation
(which is a form of the optical theorem) computing
Γ explicitly.

7

Quantum electrodynamics

7.1 The QED Lagrangian

180

7.2 One-loop divergences

183

7.3 Solved problems

186

7.1

The QED Lagrangian

Quantum electrodynamics (QED) describes the interaction between electrons (or any other charged spin 1/2 particle, like muons) and photons.
It is convenient to quantize the photons using the covariant quantization of Section 4.3.2. Actually, it is also useful to generalize slightly the
Lagrangian used in Section 4.3.2: instead of eq. (4.102), we describe the
free electromagnetic ﬁeld by
1
1
(∂µ Aµ )2 ,
Lem = − Fµν F µν −
4
2ξ

(7.1)

with ξ a generic parameter. In Section 4.3.2 we set ξ = 1, but it can be
shown that for any ξ, after requiring that ∂µ Aµ vanishes between physical states, the spectrum of the theory is given by the two transverse
polarization states of the photon. Basically this comes out because the
only role of the term (1/2ξ)(∂A)2 is to break gauge invariance and to
allow us to deﬁne the momentum conjugate to A0 . Then, between physical states, the operator ∂µ Aµ vanishes and the matrix elements between
physical states obtained with eq. (7.1) are independent of ξ. Of course
intermediate steps, like the equal time commutation relations between
Aµ and the conjugate momenta, or the propagator, do depend on ξ. In
the interacting theory, it will turn out that the dependence on ξ vanishes
if Aµ is coupled to matter respecting gauge invariance, so in particular
Aµ must be coupled to a conserved current.
It is sometimes useful to work with ξ generic, and to check the correctness of the computation verifying that in the end ξ cancels in the
matrix elements between physical states. Also, in diﬀerent problems, different choices of ξ can simplify the calculation. The term (1/2ξ)(∂A)2
is called the gauge ﬁxing term and ξ is the gauge ﬁxing parameter; the
choice ξ = 1 is called the Feynman gauge, and is typically the simplest
choice. Sometimes also the choice ξ = 0 (Landau gauge) is useful; the
Lagrangian is singular in this limit, but we will see below that the photon
propagator is well deﬁned at ξ = 0.
The interaction between the photon and the electron is written in
terms of the covariant derivative, as explained in Section 3.5.4. QED is
then described by the Lagrangian
1
1
(∂µ Aµ )2 − eAµ Ψ̄γ µ Ψ .
LQED = Ψ̄(i ∂ − m)Ψ − Fµν F µν −
4
2ξ

(7.2)

The Feynman rules of QED have already been given in Section 5.5.4. We

7.1

just add that, if we use a generic ξ = 1, the photon propagator becomes


kµ kν
−i
D̃µν (k) = 2
.
(7.3)
ηµν − (1 − ξ) 2
k + i
k
We now discuss the symmetries of the QED action. From the point
of view of space-time symmetries, QED has of course Poincaré invariance. We have also seen that the coupling is constructed in such a way
that the theory is invariant under gauge transformation, i.e. local U (1)
transformations
Ψ(x) → eieθ(x) Ψ(x) ,
Aµ (x) → Aµ (x) − ∂µ θ .

(7.4)
(7.5)

The presence of this local symmetry implies also the existence of the
corresponding global U (1) symmetry with θ a constant parameter,
Ψ(x) → eieθ Ψ(x) ,
Aµ (x) → Aµ (x) .

(7.6)
(7.7)

There is therefore an associated conserved Noether current, which is
Ψ̄γ µ Ψ, and a U (1) charge which is conserved by the electromagnetic
interaction.
To understand the meaning of this charge, observe that

Q = d3 x j 0 , with j 0 = Ψ̄γ 0 Ψ. In the Lagrangian density j 0 is coupled
to A0 , and in the Hamiltonian density j 0 enters as +eA0 j 0 . Since in
classical electrodynamics A0 is the electrostatic potential, we see that
j 0 is the electric charge density, measured in units of e, and therefore Q
is the electric charge, again in units of e. As we saw in Section 4.2, for
electrons Q = 1 and for positrons Q = −1, see eq. (4.43).
Gauge invariance implies that the photon is massless: a mass term for
the photon would correspond to a term m2γ Aµ Aµ in the Lagrangian, but
this is forbidden since it is not invariant under gauge transformations.
If gauge invariance were broken we should expect a photon mass of the
order of the symmetry-breaking scale. However, the experimental bound
on the photon mass is extraordinarily tight, mγ < 2 × 10−16 eV.
QED also has important discrete symmetries. Consider ﬁrst the parity
operation P . We have deﬁned the action of P on a quantized spinor ﬁeld
in eq. (4.58): Ψ(x) → ηa γ 0 Ψ(x ). From this it follows that the current
Ψ̄γ µ Ψ is a true four-vector, i.e. under parity the spatial components
change sign and the temporal component is invariant. Since also ∂µ is
a true four-vector, the kinetic term of the fermion is invariant under
parity. Similarly, the gauge ﬁeld Aµ is a true four-vector, so both the
kinetic term of the gauge ﬁeld and the interaction term are invariant
under P . Therefore QED is invariant under parity.
Another important symmetry is charge conjugation, C. In Section 4.2
we deﬁned the operation of charge conjugation on the quantized Dirac
spinors. We saw in Exercise 4.3 that, using the fact that the quantized
Dirac ﬁelds anticommute, the operator Ψ̄γ µ Ψ changes sign under charge
conjugation,
(7.8)
C Ψ̄γ µ ΨC = −Ψ̄γ µ Ψ .

The QED Lagrangian 181

182 Quantum electrodynamics

Observe that, even if it involves complex conjugation, on the quantized
ﬁelds C is deﬁned as a linear (rather than antilinear) operator. Its action
on the quantized Dirac ﬁeld is determined by its action on the creation
and annihilation operators ap,s , bp,s given in eq. (4.59), regardless of
the fact that the coeﬃcients of ap,s , bp,s in the expansion of Ψ are the
complex functions us (p)e−ipx and v s (p)eipx . Therefore CiΨC = iCΨC,
so also iΨ̄γ µ Ψ changes sign under charge conjugation. Then the kinetic
term transforms as
CiΨ̄γ µ ∂µ ΨC = −i(∂µ Ψ̄)γ µ Ψ ,

(7.9)

(since the term ∂µ Ψ, after the action of C, becomes proportional to
∂µ Ψ∗ and is then anticommuted to the left where it combines with a
γ 0 to give ∂µ Ψ̄) and, after integrating ∂µ by parts, the kinetic term
in the action is invariant. Since the interaction term is proportional to
Aµ Ψ̄γ µ Ψ and Ψ̄γ µ Ψ changes sign, if we deﬁne the charge conjugation on
Aµ as CAµ (x)C = −Aµ (x), QED is invariant under charge conjugation,
as we already saw in Section 4.3.2. The photon is then an eigenstate of
charge conjugation, with eigenvalue −1,
C|γ = −|γ .

(7.10)

As an example of the use of these invariance principles, we examine the
electromagnetic decay of the neutral pion. In general, a particle can
be an eigenstate of charge conjugation only if it is electrically neutral.
Consider the three pions π ± , π 0 . Apart from an arbitrary phase, we
have C|π + = |π − and C|π − = |π + . Instead, the π 0 is neutral, and
therefore C|π 0 = η|π 0 ; C has been deﬁned on spinors so that C 2 = 1
(see Section 4.2.3) and of course C 2 = 1 also on the gauge ﬁeld, so
C 2 is the identity operator. So, even if π 0 , at the fundamental level,
is a possibly complicated bound state of fermions (in terms of quarks
¯ we know that C 2 is the identity operator also when we
π 0 = uū + dd),
apply it to the π 0 , and therefore η 2 = 1 and η can only take the values
±1. To see which one is the actual value, we observe that π 0 decays
electromagnetically as
(7.11)
π 0 → 2γ .
The two-photon state is an eigenstate of C with eigenvalue (−1)2 = +1
and since the electromagnetic interaction conserves C, this must also
be the value of C for the π 0 , i.e. η = +1. In turn, this means that
the electromagnetic decay π 0 → 3γ is forbidden because it violates C.
Experimentally the decay into three photons is not observed, and the
limit is
Γ(π 0 → 3γ)
< 3.1 × 10−8 .
(7.12)
Γ(π 0 → 2γ)
Finally, the QED action is invariant under time reversal T , and therefore
also under CP T , in agreement with the CP T theorem, see Section 4.2.3.

7.2

7.2

One-loop divergences

In Section 5.6 we deﬁned the superﬁcial degree of divergence D for a
scalar ﬁeld theory, and we saw that the condition for renormalizability is
that only a limited number of Green’s functions have D  0. In QED, or
in general in the presence of fermions, the deﬁnition of D must be modiﬁed, since the fermionic propagator decreases as 1/p rather than 1/p 2 .
We denote by Nfext , Nγext the number of external fermionic and photonic
lines respectively, by Nfint , Nγint the number of internal fermionic and
photonic lines, by V the number of vertices in the graph and by L the
number of loops. Then, repeating the arguments of Section 5.6, the
superﬁcial degrees of divergence is deﬁned in QED as
D = 4L − 2Nγint − Nfint .

(7.13)

The number of loops is related to the total number of internal lines
Nfint + Nγint as in eq. (5.143),
L = Nfint + Nγint − V + 1

(7.14)

and the fact that to each vertex are associated two fermionic lines and
one photonic line means that
2V = 2Nfint + Nfext ,

V = 2Nγint + Nγext .

(7.15)

Combining these expressions, we ﬁnd
3
D = 4 − Nγext − Nfext .
2

(7.16)

This means that only the Green’s functions with Nγext + 32 Nfext  4 are
potentially dangerous. Furthermore, some of the potentially dangerous
Green’s functions are actually ﬁnite or even zero. Consider in fact the
Green’s functions with no external electron line and an arbitrary number
Nγext = n of external photon lines. They correspond to

0|Aµ1 (x1 ) . . . Aµn (xn ) exp −i d4 x HQED |0 c .
(7.17)
We have seen that the QED Hamiltonian is invariant under charge conjugation, CHQED C = HQED . Inserting multiple factors C 2 = 1 in the
above expression and using C|0 = |0 , we ﬁnd

0|Aµ1 (x1 ) . . . Aµn (xn ) exp −i d4 x HQED |0

= 0|(CAµ1 (x1 )C) . . . (CAµn (xn )C)(C exp −i d4 x HQED C)|0

n
(7.18)
= (−1) 0|Aµ1 (x1 ) . . . Aµn (xn ) exp −i d4 x HQED |0 .
Therefore the Green’s functions with no external fermion lines and with
an odd number of external photon lines are identically zero, to all orders
in perturbation theory (Furry’s theorem).

One-loop divergences 183

184 Quantum electrodynamics
1

As in Section 5.6, this does not mean
that the other Green’s functions have
no divergences, but that their divergencies are automatically cured by the
renormalization of Green’s functions
with a smaller number of external legs.

k

p_ k

p

p

Fig. 7.1 The one-loop electron self-

energy.
k
q

q
k−q

Fig. 7.2 The one-loop photon self-

energy.

p+k

p’ + k
p’

k

Fig. 7.3 The one-loop vertex correc-

tion.

k1

k3

p

p−k 3

p−k 1

k2



d4 k
iΠµν (q) ≡ (−1)
(7.20)
(2π)4

i( k + m)
i( k −  q + m)
×Tr (−ieγµ ) 2
(−ieγν )
.
k − m2 + i
(k − q)2 − m2 + i

q

p

Thus, we are ﬁnally left with the following potentially dangerous1
Green’s functions: if Nfext = 0 we can have
(i) Nγext = 0. This is a vacuum diagram, and can be cured simply by
normal ordering the Hamiltonian.
(ii) Nγext = 2. This is a divergence in the photon propagator.
(iii) Nγext = 4. This is a light–light scattering amplitude.
If instead Nfext = 2 (recall that Nfext must be even, as we see from the
ﬁrst equation in (7.15), and as dictated by charge conservation) we can
have only
(i) Nγext = 0 (the fermion propagator), and
(ii) Nγext = 1 (the interaction vertex).
If Nfext  4 all Green’s functions have instead D < 0. Let us discuss
these UV divergences at the one-loop level. The corresponding one-loop
diagrams are shown in Figs. 7.1–7.4. Using for simplicity the Feynman
gauge ξ = 1, the graph in Fig. 7.1 is given by



i( p −  k + m)
iη µν
d4 k
(−ieγµ ) − 2
(−ieγν ) .
iΣ(p) ≡
(2π)4
k
(p − k)2 − m2 + i
(7.19)
The correction to the photon propagator is given by the graph in Fig. 7.2,

p−k1 −k2

k4

Fig. 7.4 The one-loop light–light
scattering amplitude.

The minus sign comes from the fermionic loop, and writing explicitly
the Dirac indices one can check that they combine to give a trace. The
correction to the interaction vertex in Fig. 7.3 is



d4 k
iη νρ
i( p  +  k + m)
(−ieγ
)
−
(−ieγρ ) 
−iΓµ (p, q) ≡
ν
4
2
(2π)
k
(p + k)2 − m2 + i
i( p +  k + m)
×(−ieγµ )
,
(7.21)
(p + k)2 − m2 + i
with q + p = p . The one-loop light–light scattering amplitude of Fig. 7.4
is instead given by (the +i are understood)


( p + m)
d4 p
4 4
Tr γ µ 2
Aµνρσ (k1 , k2 , k3 , k4 ) = (−1)(−ie) i
4
(2π)
p − m2
( p −  k 3 + m) ρ ( p −  k 1 −  k 2 + m)
×γ ν
γ
(p − k3 )2 − m2 (p − k1 − k2 )2 − m2
( p −  k 1 + m)
× γσ
,
(7.22)
(p − k1 )2 − m2
with k1 + k2 = k3 + k4 . The integrals in eqs. (7.19), (7.20) and (7.21) are
UV divergent, so to make sense of them we must specify a regularization
procedure. Putting a cutoﬀ Λ in Euclidean momentum space, as we did
in Chapter 5 for λφn theories, is not at all convenient in a gauge theory.

7.2

The problem is that putting such a cutoﬀ means that we are setting to
zero all momentum modes of the ﬁelds with k > Λ. However, even if we
set to zero all Fourier modes of the gauge ﬁeld Ãµ (k) with k > Λ, these
modes are regenerated by a gauge transformation Aµ (x) → Aµ (x)− ∂µ θ,
with θ generic. In other words, a cutoﬀ in momentum space is not compatible with gauge invariance. In general, it is very dangerous to break
a symmetry of the theory by the regularization. One would naively expect that the symmetry is recovered when we remove the cutoﬀ, but this
turns out to be not at all automatic (if the symmetry is not recovered,
one says that there is an anomaly in the theory). If the gauge symmetry
became anomalous it would be a disaster. We saw in Section 4.3 that
gauge invariance is crucial in order to eliminate the spurious degrees of
freedom from the gauge ﬁeld Aµ and remain with a massless particle
with two helicity states h = ±1, as is the photon. It is therefore much
more convenient to regularize the theory maintaining gauge invariance
explicitly. The two most useful gauge invariant regularizations are dimensional regularization and Pauli–Villars regularization. The former
is based on the following idea. Consider for example

1
dd k
,
(7.23)
Id ≡
(2π)d (k 2 + ∆)2
where we have already performed the Wick rotation, so k is now a Euclidean momentum, while ∆ is some combination of external momenta
and masses. We are interested in d = 4, but we keep for the moment
d generic. For d = 4, this is one of the typical divergent parts of the
diagrams written above. Now one observes that, if d < 4, the integral is
convergent and the result can be written in terms of the Euler Γ function,
  d
Γ(2 − d2 ) 1 2− 2
1
.
(7.24)
Id =
∆
(4π)d/2 Γ(2)
The function Γ(z) has isolated poles at z = 0, −1, −2, . . . and therefore
the integral diverges in d = 4, 6, 8, . . ., and is otherwise well deﬁned, even
for d non-integer. We can therefore take the right-hand side of eq. (7.24)
as the deﬁnition of Id for generic d, real or even complex. We can now
study it in d = 4 −  dimensions, and in the limit  → 0 we recover our
divergence; from the known behavior of the Γ function near the poles
one ﬁnds that, as  → 0,


2
∆
1
−
log
−
γ
+
O()
,
(7.25)
I4− →
(4π)2 
4π
where γ  0.5772 . . . is called the Euler–Mascheroni constant. We have
therefore succeeded in writing the integral as a divergent part plus a
ﬁnite term;  plays the role of the cutoﬀ.
The Pauli–Villars regularization is instead based on the idea of modifying the form of the propagator in the UV, so that it goes to zero more
rapidly and helps the convergence of the loop integrals. For instance,
the photon propagator is modiﬁed by the replacement
1
1
1
→ 2
− 2
.
(7.26)
2
k − i
k − i k + Λ2 − i

One-loop divergences 185

186 Quantum electrodynamics

In the limit Λ → ∞ we recover the original propagator, but for ﬁnite Λ
at large k 2 the propagator decreases as 1/k 4 rather than 1/k 2 .
It can be shown that both dimensional and Pauli–Villars regularizations preserve gauge invariance. There is a well-developed technology
for computing integrals and renormalizing the theory in these schemes,
see, e.g. Peskin and Schroeder (1995) or Weinberg (1995).
Once we have regularized the integrals, respecting gauge invariance,
we can adapt to QED the same reasoning explained in the case of λφ4
theory; then, the graph in Fig. 7.1 can be treated exactly as we did in
Section 5.5.2 for the scalar propagator, and the divergence is reabsorbed
in a renormalization of the mass and of the wave function of the fermion.
The graph in Fig. 7.2 instead gives a result of the form


(7.27)
Πµν (q) = ηµν q 2 − qµ qν Π(q 2 ) ,
with Π(q 2 ) divergent. This divergence is reabsorbed in a renormalization
of the wave function of the photon. It is important that in Πµν (q) there
is no term proportional to ηµν times a constant (rather than ηµν q 2 ),
since this would have provided a renormalization of the mass of the
photon. However, a photon mass term m2 Aµ Aµ in the Lagrangian is
forbidden by gauge invariance, and therefore such a term is not produced
using a gauge-invariant regularization. Finally, the graph in Fig. 7.3
renormalizes the electric charge.
The graph in Fig. 7.4, in a naive power counting, seems logarithmically
divergent. However the explicit computation shows that this graph is
ﬁnite because the would-be divergent term inside the integral actually
vanishes.
After reabsorbing the divergences into the renormalized ﬁelds, renormalized mass and renormalized charge, all other Green’s function are
one-loop ﬁnite. This turns out to hold at all loops, and QED is renormalizable.
µ+

e+
p’

7.3

k’

Solved problems

q
p
e

_

k
µ

_

Fig. 7.5 The amplitude for e+ e− →

µ+ µ− at order e2 ; p, p are the incoming momenta of the electron and
positron, respectively, and k, k  the
outgoing momenta of µ− and µ+ .

Problem 7.1. e+ e− → γ → µ+ µ−
As a prototype of many similar computations, we evaluate the cross-section
for the process e+ e− → µ+ µ− in QED. Remember, however, that when we
approach the electroweak scale we cannot limit ourselves to QED and there
is also a contribution to the amplitude from the Z 0 , e+ e− → Z 0 → µ+ µ− ,
which becomes resonant at E = mZ  90 GeV. As long as the CM energy E
is much smaller that mZ we can neglect it.
In QED at lowest order there is only one Feynman graph, shown in Fig. 7.5.
The Feynman rules give
„
«


−i
qµ qν
iMf i = v̄ s (p )(−ieγ µ )us (p) 2 ηµν − (1 − ξ) 2
ūr (k)(−ieγ ν )v r (k ) ,
q
q
(7.28)

7.3
where q = p + p and the assignment of the momenta to the various particles
is as in Fig. 7.5. First of all, we observe that the term ∼ qµ qν in the photon
propagator gives zero. In fact, using q = p + p ,
“ 
”
” “ 

qµ v̄ s (p )γ µ us (p) = v̄ s (p ) p  us (p) + v̄ s (p ) ( pus (p)) .
(7.29)
Using the Dirac equations for u and for v̄, given in eqs. (3.100) and (3.115),
we see that the right-hand side of eq. (7.29) is equal to




−m v̄ s (p )us (p) + m v̄ s (p )us (p) = 0 .

(7.30)

Therefore the matrix element is independent of the gauge ﬁxing parameter ξ,
as we expected from gauge invariance. The origin of this result is the fact
that in the interaction Lagrangian Aµ is coupled to the current Ψ̄γ µ Ψ, which
is conserved on the equations of motion since it is the Noether current of the
U (1) symmetry. We therefore recover, at the quantum level, a condition that
we already found classically in Section 3.5.4: to preserve gauge-invariance, a
gauge ﬁeld must be coupled to a conserved current.
Let us now perform the computation of the scattering cross-section for
e+ e− → µ+ µ− . Using the notation s = q 2 for the square of the CM energy
we have
|Mf i |2 =

´`
´
e4 `
ū(µ− )γ µ v(µ+ ) v̄(µ+ )γ ν u(µ− )
s2`
´`
´
× v̄(e+ )γµ u(e− ) ū(e− )γν v(e+ ) .

(7.31)

We have used the notation u(e− ) = us (p), etc. in which instead of writing
explicitly the momentum and spin we have written the particles to which they
refer, and we used the identity (ūγ µ v)∗ = v̄γ µ u, which is easily derived using
(γ µ )† = γ 0 γ µ γ 0 .
If we are interested in a process with a speciﬁc spin structure, i.e. if we
know the spin of the initial particles and we are interested in the amplitude
with a given value of the spin of the ﬁnal particle, we can use the explicit
expression for us (p), v s (p) given in Section 4.2. However, it is more common
that we have an unpolarized beam, so we do not know the spin of the initial
particle, and we accept in the detector all ﬁnal particles, without measuring
their spin state. In this case we must average the cross-section over the initial
spin state and sum it over the ﬁnal spin state. To understand how to perform
the sum over spins it can be convenient, even if a bit tedious, to write out
explicitly the Dirac indices and rewrite the above expression as
e4
µ
ν
ūa (µ− )γab
vb (µ+ )v̄c (µ+ )γcd
ud (µ− )
s2
×v̄a (e+ )(γµ )a b ub (e− )ūc (e− )(γν )c d vd (e+ )
˜
˜
ˆ
e4 ˆ
µ
ν
= 2 u(µ− )ū(µ− ) da γab
v(µ+ )v̄(µ+ ) bc γcd
sˆ
˜
˜
ˆ
× v(e+ )v̄(e+ ) d a (γµ )a b u(e− )ū(e− ) b c (γν )c d . (7.32)

|Mf i |2 =

Recalling now eqs. (3.112) and (3.113) we see that, summing over the spin
states, [v(µ+ )v̄(µ+ )]bc can be replaced by (k  − mµ )bc , and [u(µ− )ū(µ− )]da
by (k + mµ )da . Similarly for the initial electrons; here however we have to
average, rather than to sum, over the two spin states, so u(e− )ū(e− ) is replaced
by (1/2)( p + me ) and v(e+ )v̄(e+ ) by (1/2)( p  − me ). Looking at the structure

Solved problems 187

188 Quantum electrodynamics
of the Dirac indices, we see that they are cyclic and can be rewritten in matrix
form as traces. Therefore
ˆ
˜ ˆ
˜
e4
1X
|Mf i |2 = 2 Tr (k + mµ )γ µ (k  − mµ )γ ν Tr ( p + me )γν ( p  − me )γµ .
4 spin
4s
(7.33)
The traces can be performed using the identities
Tr(γ µ γ ν ) = 4η µν ,
µ ν

ρ σ

Tr(γ γ γ γ ) = 4(η

µν

(7.34)

η

ρσ

−η

µρ νσ

η

+η

µσ νρ

η ),

(7.35)

while the trace of an odd number of γ matrices vanishes (for other useful
identities, see, e.g. Peskin and Schroeder (1995), page 133). The factors
η µν can then be used to contract the various momenta between them. The
resulting scalar products are most easily computed in the CM frame. In this
frame p = (E, p), p = (E, −p) with (2E)2 = s and p2 = E 2 − m2e , while
k = (E, k), k  = (E, −k) with k2 = E 2 − m2µ . Denoting by θ the angle
between p and k, the result is
»
–
4m2µ
m2e + m2µ
4m2e
1X
2
2
4
+ (1 −
)(1 −
) cos θ . (7.36)
|Mf i | = e 1 + 4
4 spin
s
s
s
To compute the cross-section we use eq. (6.43), with
1X
|Mf i |2
|Mf i |2 →
4 spin

(7.37)

p
√
and with |p| = E 2 − m2e , |p | = E 2 − m2µ . Introducing α = e2 /(4π) we
get
«1/2 »
„
–
m2e + m2µ
4m2µ
α2 1 − (4m2µ /s)
4m2e
dσ
2
1
+
4
=
+
(1
−
)(1
−
)
cos
θ
.
dΩ
4s 1 − (4m2e /s)
s
s
s
(7.38)
√
√
In the large energy limit, me , mµ  s (but still s  mZ otherwise QED
is not the correct theory to use, and we must resort to the Standard Model)
we have
α2
dσ

(1 + cos2 θ)
(7.39)
dΩ
4s
and, performing the angular integration, the total cross-section in this limit is
σ

4πα2
.
3s

(7.40)

Problem 7.2. Electromagnetic form factors

q

p1

p2

Fig. 7.6 The tree-level vertex. The

photon is oﬀ-shell.

In this problem we study the most general form of the radiative corrections to
the electron–photon vertex, and we will show that the eﬀect of loop corrections,
to all orders in α, is contained in two form factors, describing the electric charge
density and the magnetic dipole density.
Consider ﬁrst of all the graph in Fig. 7.6, where the initial and ﬁnal electrons
are on-shell, i.e. p21 = p22 = m2e , while the photon line with momentum q µ can
be an internal line of a more general graph, and therefore q 2 is generic.
Consider the electromagnetic current operator
µ
Jem
(x) = Ψ̄(x)γ µ Ψ(x) ,

(7.41)

7.3

+

(a)

+

(c)

(b)

+

+

+

....

(d)

=

(e)
Fig. 7.7 Loop corrections to the vertex. The graph (a) is the tree-level contri-

bution. The one-loop contributions are given by the graphs (b), (c), (d) and
by a graph like (d), but with the photon line on the other electron line. The
graph (e) is an example of a two-loop graph. The sum over all possible graphs
is indicated by the blob.
where Ψ is the full quantum ﬁeld, rather than the free ﬁeld in the interaction
picture. The information on the electron–photon vertex, to all orders in α, is
contained in the matrix element of this current between the initial and ﬁnal
electron states,
µ
(x)|p1  .
(7.42)
p2 |Jem
(For notational simplicity, we suppress the spin labels in the initial and ﬁnal
state.) At tree level, we just substitute Ψ with the free ﬁeld (4.32) and we
compute the matrix element explicitly,
µ
(x)|p1 |tree = ū(p2 )γ µ u(p1 ) e−i(p1 −p2 )x .
p2 |Jem

(7.43)

This is the contribution to the matrix element of the iT operator. The factors e−i(p1 −p2 )x , together with similar factors from the other external lines of
the complete Feynman diagram, contribute to the overall Dirac delta expressing energy–momentum conservation, which is extracted from the deﬁnition of
Mf i , see eq. (5.115). These exponential factors can be extracted to all orders
in perturbation theory, simply observing that, if P̂ is the momentum operator,
we have
µ
µ
(x) = eiP̂ x Jem
(0)e−iP̂ x
(7.44)
Jem
and therefore
µ
µ
µ
p2 |Jem
(x)|p1  = p2 |eiP̂ x Jem
(0)e−iP̂ x |p1  = e−i(p1 −p2 )x p2 |Jem
(0)|p1  .
(7.45)
µ
(0)|p1  and at tree level
So, the object which enters in Mf i is p2 |Jem
µ
(0)|p1 |tree = ū(p2 )γ µ u(p1 ) .
p2 |Jem

(7.46)

The one-loop corrections and an example of a two-loop graph are shown in
Fig. 7.7, and we have generically denoted by a blob the sum of all possible
radiative corrections, to all orders in α. Of course, it is not possible to compute
this sum explicitly. However, the result is constrained by Lorentz invariance,

Solved problems 189

190 Quantum electrodynamics
parity and gauge invariance. Lorentz invariance implies that the result must
be a four-vector, so we should ask what four-vectors can be constructed with
the spinors ū(p2 ) and u(p1 )
The most general fermion bilinears have been classiﬁed in eq. (3.119). Using
the variables
µ
µ
q µ = pµ
(7.47)
pµ = pµ
1 + p2 ,
2 − p1 ,
the most general four-vectors that we can construct with the spinors ū2 =
ū(p2 ) and u1 = u(p1 ) is a linear combination of
ū2 pµ u1 ,

ū2 q µ u1 ,

ū2 γ µ u1 ,

ū2 σ µν pν u1 ,

ū2 σ µν qν u1 ,

(7.48)

which are true four-vectors, plus the corresponding pseudovectors obtained
µ
(0)|p1  must be a combination of these quaninserting γ 5 . Therefore p2 |Jem
tities.
µ
0
(x) is a true four-vector, so it transforms as Jem
(t, x ) →
Under parity Jem
0
i
i
µ
(t, x ) →
Jem (t, −x ) and Jem (t, x ) → −Jem (t, −x ) or, more compactly, as Jem
µ
(t, −x ), with no sum over the µ index. At the same time, under parity
η µµ Jem
the state |p1  → ηe |p1 , where ηe is the intrinsic parity of the electron and p1 is
the parity-reversed momentum, p1 = (p01 , −pi1 ); similarly p2 | → p2 |ηe∗ , with
the same ηe since we have an electron both in the initial and in the ﬁnal state.
µ
(0)|p1 ,
The term ηe∗ ηe = 1 therefore cancels and the matrix element p2 |Jem
under parity, picks a factor η µµ while the momenta p1 , p2 become parityreversed. This is the same transformation properties of the ﬁve terms displayed
in eq. (7.48), while the corresponding quantities constructed with γ 5 pick an
overall −η µµ factor. Since parity is a symmetry of QED, only the terms in
eq. (7.48) can enter in the parametrization of the matrix element that we are
considering, while the terms with γ 5 are absent.
Another simpliﬁcation comes from the fact that, when u1 , ū2 are solutions
of the Dirac equation with masses m1 , m2 respectively (in our case m1 = m2 =
me ), there is an algebraic identity, known as the Gordon identity: from the
deﬁnition of σ µν ,
i
i
ū2 [γµ , γν ](pν2 − pν1 )u1 = ū2 [γµ p2 − γµ p1 − p2 γµ + p1 γµ ] u1 .
2
2
(7.49)
In the ﬁrst and in the fourth term we anticommute p with γ µ , so that p1 is
next to u1 and p2 is next to ū2 , using
ū2 σµν q ν u1 =

γµ p2 = ({γµ , γν } − γν γµ ) pν2 = 2p2,µ − p2 γµ ,

(7.50)

and similarly for p1 γµ . Then we use p1 u1 = m1 u1 and ū2 p2 = m2 ū2 , see
eqs. (3.100) and (3.114), and we ﬁnd
ū2 σµν q ν u1 = iū2 [pµ − (m1 + m2 )γµ ] u1 .

(7.51)

Similarly, considering ū2 σµν pν u1 , we ﬁnd
ū2 σµν pν u1 = iū2 [q µ + (m1 − m2 )γ µ ] u1 .

(7.52)

We can use these identities to eliminate ū2 σ µν pν u1 and ū2 pµ u1 from the list
µ
(0)|p1  is at most a
of independent bilinears. Therefore we ﬁnd that p2 |Jem
linear combination of ū(p2 )γ µ u(p1 ), ū(p2 )σ µν qν u(p1 ) and ū(p2 )q µ u(p1 ). The
coeﬃcients must be Lorentz invariant functions. With pµ and q µ we can
construct the invariants q 2 , p2 and qp. However, qp = p22 − p21 = 0, while q 2
and p2 are not independent since q 2 = p22 + p21 − 2p2 p1 = 2m2e − 2p2 p1 and

7.3
p2 = p22 + p21 + 2p2 p1 = 2m2e + 2p2 p1 , so that q 2 + p2 = 4m2e . We choose q 2 as
the independent variable. Then
i
ū2 σ µν qν u1 + f3 (q 2 ) ū2 q µ u1 .
2me
(7.53)
The factor i in iσ µν qν is chosen so that f2 (q 2 ) is real, and the factor 1/2me
is a convenient normalization, so that f2 (q 2 ) is dimensionless, as f1 (q 2 ). We
now make use of the fact that, as a consequence of gauge invariance, the
µ
(x) = 0. Using eq. (7.45) we see
electromagnetic current is conserved, ∂µ Jem
that this means that
µ
(0)|p1  = 0 .
(7.54)
qµ p2 |Jem
µ
p2 |Jem
(0)|p1  = f1 (q 2 ) ū2 γ µ u1 + f2 (q 2 )

The term ū2 γ µ u1 satisﬁes this condition, since qµ ū2 γ µ u1 = ū2 ( p2 − p1 )u1
vanishes because u1 and u2 are solutions of the equations of motion. Also the
term ū2 σ µν qν u1 satisﬁes the condition: σ µν qν qµ vanishes identically because
σ µν is antisymmetric. Instead qµ ū2 q µ u1 = q 2 ū2 u1 does not vanish, since the
photon is in general oﬀ-shell, and q 2 = 0. Current conservation is exact to all
orders in α, since it is a consequence of gauge invariance, which means that
the function f3 (q 2 ) must be identically zero.
In conclusion, the most general parametrization of the matrix element of
the electromagnetic current, compatible with Lorentz invariance, parity and
current conservation (i.e. with gauge invariance) is
µ
p2 |Jem
(0)|p1  = f1 (q 2 ) ū2 γ µ u1 + f2 (q 2 )

i
qν ū2 σ µν u1 .
2me

(7.55)

The functions f1 (q 2 ) and f2 (q 2 ) are called form factors. Comparison with
eq. (7.46) shows that at tree level f1 (q 2 ) = 1 and f2 (q 2 ) = 0. We now want
to understand their physical meaning. This can be obtained considering their
eﬀect on the scattering amplitude. The meaning of f1 can be understood
considering its eﬀect on the scattering of the electron on a static source, such
as a heavy atom. We computed it at lowest order in Section 6.6. Including
f1 , eq. (6.77) becomes
Ze2
(7.56)
Mf i (q) = 2 f1 (q ) ,
q
where we have taken into account that, for elastic scattering, q µ = (0, q )
and we denoted by f1 (q ) the function f1 (q 2 ) evaluated at q µ = (0, q ) . The
interaction potential (6.78) then becomes
Z
V (x ) = −Ze2

d3 q f1 (q ) iq ·x
e
.
(2π)3 q 2

We denote by ρ(x ) the inverse Fourier transform of f1 (q ),
Z

f1 (q ) = d3 x ρ(x  )e−iq ·x .

(7.57)

(7.58)

Then
Z
V (x ) = −Ze
=−

2

Ze2
4π

3 



d x ρ(x )
Z

d3 x 

Z

d3 q 1 iq ·(x −x  )
e
(2π)3 q 2

1
ρ(x  ) .
|x − x  |

(7.59)

Solved problems 191

192 Quantum electrodynamics
This is the Coulomb potential generated by a charge distribution ρ(x ), and
therefore the form factor f1 (q ) is the Fourier transform of the charge distribution. We see that the eﬀect of loop corrections is to delocalize the charge
distribution of the electron, which is a Dirac delta at tree level and becomes
ρ(x ) after the electron is “dressed” by the radiative corrections. We also see
that, to all orders in α, f1 (0) = 1, since it is just the total electron charge, in
units of e.
The meaning of the second form factor is more easily understood looking
rather at the scattering in an external magnetic ﬁeld. Instead of specifying
the structure of the source, we can more simply write the interaction with an
external ﬁeld Aext
µ in the form
µ
Lext = −eAext
µ Jem .

(7.60)

=0
We consider again a static external ﬁeld, so q 0 = 0, but now we take Aext
0
and ∇ × A = B. The amplitude is

µ
Mf i = −ef1 (q )Ãext
µ (q)ū(p )γ u(p) − ef2 (q )

= ef1 (q )Ãiext (q)ū(p )γ i u(p) − i

i

µν
u(p)
Ãext
µ (q)qν ū(p )σ
2me

e
f2 (q )Ãiext (q)q j ū(p )σ ij u(p). (7.61)
2me

We consider a slowly varying ﬁeld, so we take q → 0 and we keep only
the ﬁrst non-vanishing contribution. The computation is performed in detail
in Peskin and Schroeder (1995), Section 6.2, so we simply quote the result.
The expansion in powers of q starts from a constant spin-independent term
proportional to p + p . This is the contribution of the operator p · A + A · p
from the non-relativistic Hamiltonian (p − eA)2 /2me . We are more interested
in the next term, which is linear in q and depends on the spin, and gets
a contribution both from f1 and from f2 . The result, limiting ourselves to
processes with the same spin state for the initial and ﬁnal electron, is
Mf i 

e
[f1 (0) + f2 (0)]B̃qi ξ † σ i ξ .
2me

(7.62)

where Mf i = Mf i /(2me ) is the matrix element with a non-relativistic normalization for the electron, and is related to the scattering potential as in
eq. (6.71); B̃qi is the Fourier component of the magnetic ﬁeld. Using the results of Section 6.6, we can see that this is the scattering amplitude that would
be generated, in the non-relativistic theory, by a potential
V (x ) = −µ·B(x )

(7.63)

“ σ ”
e
[f1 (0) + f2 (0)] ξ † ξ .
(7.64)
me
2
From (7.63) we see that µ is a magnetic dipole moment. Since f1 (0) = 1 to
all orders in perturbation theory, the magnetic moment µ is related to the
expectation value of the spin operator,
with

µ=

σ
ξ,
2

(7.65)

e
S,
2me

(7.66)

g−2
= f2 (0) .
2

(7.67)

S = ξ†
by
µ=g
where g = 2 + 2f2 (0), or

Exercises 193
The form factor f2 (q 2 ) therefore gives a correction to the magnetic dipole
moment. At tree level, f2 (0) = 0 and we recover the result that we found
from the Dirac equation, see eq. (3.186). Deviations from g = 2 therefore
come from the loop corrections to f2 (0). The one-loop result, ﬁrst derived by
Schwinger in 1948, turns out to be f2 (0) = α/(2π).

Summary of chapter
• QED describes the interactions of spin 1/2 charged particles with
photons. The Feynman rules are summarized in Fig. 7.8. The wave
functions associated to the external legs were given on page 135.
• QED is renormalizable. The one-loop divergences are studied in
Section 7.2 and are reabsorbed into the renormalization of the
fermion mass, fermion wave function, photon wave function and
electric charge. The photon mass is protected against loop corrections by gauge invariance.
• Invariance principles constrain the form of loop corrections to all
orders. In particular, the vertex is parametrized by two form factors, representing the charge density and the magnetic dipole density.

=

p
=

k

i
___________
p/ − m + iε
µ kν ]
− i [ η µν − (1−ξ) k___
_____
2
k 2+ i ε
k

µ
q
p1

=

p2

−i e γ

µ

Fig. 7.8 The Feynman rules for

QED.

Further reading
• QED is discussed in great detail in many books.
See, in particular, Itzykson and Zuber (1980), Peskin and Schroeder (1995), Weinberg (1995) and
Landau and Lifshitz, vol. IV (1982).
• Many useful theoretical and experimental results
are collected in Quantum Electrodynamics, T. Kinoshita ed., World Scientiﬁc 1990. This includes reviews on high-precision tests of QED, a description

of measurements and of calculations of the magnetic moment of electrons and muons, hydrogenic
bound states, Lamb shift experiments, hyperﬁne
structure experiments, precision measurements in
positronium, etc.
• For an explicit calculation of the g − 2 of the electron at O(α) and of the Lamb shift see, e.g. Mandl
and Shaw (1984), Section 9.6.

Exercises
(7.1) (i) Write the Feynman diagrams for the annihilation e+ e− → 2γ, to lowest perturbative order.
(ii) Write the modulus squared of the amplitude as
a trace, averaging over the initial spins and summing over the ﬁnal helicities. Evaluate the trace in
the limit p → 0, where p is the electron momen-

tum in the CM.
(iii) Compute the cross-section σ̄ of the process (averaged and summed over the initial and ﬁnal spins)
in the limit p → 0. Show that the ﬂux factor I can
be written as
(7.68)
I = E1 E2 v ,

194 Quantum Electrodynamics
where E1 , E2 are the energies of the two incoming
particles in the CM and v their relative velocity.
Using this, and the value of |M|2 computed above,
verify that in the limit p → 0,
σ̄e+ e− →2γ →

2
πrB
,
v

(7.69)

with rB = α/me .
(7.2) In this exercise we compute the decay rate of
positronium (the hydrogenoid bound state of e+
and e− ) into two photons, restricting to positronium states with orbital angular momentum L = 0.
(i) Using the results of Exercise 4.1, show that, if
L = 0, the annihilation can take place only when
the e+ e− pair has total angular momentum J = 0,
and that the cross-section σ̄, averaged over initial
spin and summed over the ﬁnal helicities, is given
by
1
(7.70)
σ̄ = σ (J =0) ,
4
where σ (J =0) is the cross-section with the e+ e− pair
in the state with J = 0.
(ii) Consider ﬁrst the cross-section for the annihilation e+ e− → 2γ,
Z
1
|Me+ e− →2γ |2 dΦ(2)
(7.71)
σ=
4I
(we include the 1/2! for the identical photons in
dΦ(2) ). Using eq. (7.68) show that
Z
σv = |Me+ e− →2γ |2 dΦ(2) ,
(7.72)
where Mf i is the matrix element with the normalization of one particle per unit volume. Verify also
that
Z
(7.73)
ΓPos→2γ = |MPos→2γ |2 dΦ(2) ,

where in MPos→2γ the positronium state (labeled
“Pos”) is normalized as one particle per unit volume.
(iii) Write Me+ e− →2γ = 2γ|p , −p  where p is the
electron momentum in the CM, and MPos→2γ =
2γ|Pos, where the positronium is at rest. Show
that
Z
d3 p
2γ|p , −p ψ̃(p ) , (7.74)
MPos→2γ =
(2π)3
where ψ̃(p ) is the positronium wave function in
momentum space.
(iv) Justify the fact that ψ̃(p ) is peaked at small
values of the momentum, |p | ∼ (1/2)me α, and
from this derive that, at lowest order in α,
MPos→2γ  ψ(0) lim 2γ|p , −p  ,
p →0

(7.75)

where ψ(x) is the wave function in position space.
Using eqs. (7.72) and (7.73) derive the relation
ΓPos→2γ = |ψ(0)|2 lim σ (J =0) v .
p →0

(7.76)

(v) The wave functions of positronium are the same
as the hydrogen atom, with the replacement of
the reduced mass, which is approximately me in
the hydrogen atom, with me /2 for the e+ e− system. Then, in the state with quantum numbers
n = 0, L = 0,
1
e−r/a ,
ψ(r) = √
πa3

(7.77)

with a = 2/(me α). Using the cross-section (7.69)
and eqs. (7.76) and (7.70) show that, for the state
n = L = 0,
1
ΓPos→2γ = me α5 .
(7.78)
2
Compare this result with the experimental value of
the lifetime, Γ = 7.994(11) ns−1 .

The low-energy limit of the
electroweak theory
In this section we begin our study of weak interactions. The electroweak
theory is described by the Standard Model (SM). A systematic explanation of the SM is beyond the scope of this course, but in the next
chapters we will introduce two of the most important theoretical tools
for its construction, i.e. non-abelian gauge ﬁelds and the Higgs mechanism.
However, the full structure of the SM is only revealed at energies
comparable to the masses of the bosons W ± and Z 0 that, together
with the photon, mediate the electroweak interaction. Since mW =
80.425(38) GeV and mZ = 91.1876(21) GeV, the weak decays of particles
with masses between a few hundred MeV and a few GeV, as for instance
the muons, the pions, the kaons, the neutron, charmed mesons like the
D0 , etc., can be studied in a low-energy approximation to the SM. For
instance in the β-decay of the free neutron, n → pe− ν̄e , we have a mass
diﬀerence mn − mp  1.29 MeV. Therefore, even if at the fundamental
level the decay is mediated by the W -boson, the fact that the maximum
momentum transfer is much smaller than mW allows us to use a lowenergy eﬀective theory. The same approximation holds for nuclear βdecays.
For the same reason, we can use the low-energy theory when we
study a scattering process mediated by weak interactions, as for instance
e− νe → e− νe , at center-of mass energies well below mW .
In this chapter we introduce this low-energy approximation, which is
given by a four-fermion model, and we will understand how it can be
obtained “integrating out” some heavy gauge bosons. We will then illustrate in detail in the Solved Problems section how to use it to compute
explicitly many weak decays.

8.1

A four-fermion model

As a preliminary exercise, we consider a theory with a single Dirac
fermion Ψ, and a Lagrangian
L = Ψ̄ (i ∂ − m) Ψ + G(Ψ̄Ψ)2 .

(8.1)

The interaction is given by a four-fermion term, and in the Feynman
diagrams we have vertices where four fermionic lines meet at a point,

8
8.1 A four-fermion model

195

8.2 Charged and neutral currents
in the Standard Model
197
8.3 Solved problems: weak
decays

202

196 The low-energy limit of the electroweak theory

−i g
Fig. 8.1 The exchange of a massive
intermediate boson reduces to a fourfermion interaction in the low-energy
limit.

ig

−i g
2

i
2

p << M

2

M

2

2

= iG

2

p − M

similarly to the λφ4 theory. The diﬀerence, however,
is that the coupling

constant G is not dimensionless. In fact, since d4 x L is dimensionless,
from the kinetic term we see that Ψ has dimensions of (mass)3/2 , and
therefore G ∼ (mass)−2 . As we saw in Section 5.6, a negative mass
dimension for the coupling means that the theory is not renormalizable.
We denote the fermion by f and the antifermion by f¯. If we compute
a scattering amplitude f f¯ → f f¯ at tree level in this theory, we ﬁnd


iMf f→f
¯
f¯ = iG [v̄(p1 )u(p2 )ū(p2 )v(p1 )] ,

(8.2)

where u, v are the wave functions, p1 , p2 the initial momenta and p1 , p2
the ﬁnal momenta. We want to compare this four-fermion theory with
a theory where the fermion is coupled not directly to itself, but rather
to a massive real scalar ﬁeld with mass M , so we consider a theory with
action

1
1
(8.3)
S = d4 x [ ∂ µ φ∂µ φ − M 2 φ2 + Ψ̄ (i ∂ − m) Ψ − gφΨ̄Ψ] ,
2
2
where g is a coupling constant which, by dimensional analysis, is immediately seen to be dimensionless. The f f¯ → f f¯ scattering amplitude at
tree level in this theory is given by the Feynman diagram on the left of
Fig. 8.1 and the Feynman rules give
2
iMf f→f
¯
f¯ = (−ig)

i
p2 − M 2

[v̄(p1 )u(p2 )ū(p2 )v(p1 )] ,

(8.4)

2
, and Ecm is the energy in the center of
where p2 = (p1 + p2 )2 = Ecm
mass. Therefore

iMf f→f
¯
f¯ = i

g2
[v̄(p1 )u(p2 )ū(p2 )v(p1 )] .
2
M 2 − Ecm

(8.5)

We see that at low energies, Ecm
M , the amplitudes (8.5) and (8.2)
coincide if we make the identiﬁcation
G=

g2
.
M2

(8.6)

More generally, consider an arbitrary amplitude, with all external momenta small compared to M and regularize the theory putting a cutoﬀ
<M , so that also all the momenta circulating
in momentum space Λ ∼

8.2

Charged and neutral currents in the Standard Model 197

in the loops are smaller than M . Then, in all internal lines the scalar
propagator can be approximated as
i
i
→− 2
p2 − M 2
M

(8.7)

and, with the identiﬁcation (8.6), the Feynman rules of this scalarfermion theory become identical to those of the four-fermion theory (8.1).
Therefore the four-fermion theory (8.1) can be seen as the low-energy
limit of the theory (8.3), which has only dimensionless couplings and
indeed is renormalizable. We see that, even if the four-fermion theory is
not renormalizable, it can nevertheless be a useful low-energy approximation to a renormalizable theory. The presence of a coupling G with
dimensions (mass)−2 is now seen to be a signal of the existence of a particle with mass M and coupling g, with G, M and g related by eq. (8.6).
The situation for the low-energy limit of the electroweak theory is conceptually similar, but with more complicated four-fermion terms compared to this toy model. In the next section we will ﬁrst of all introduce
the fermionic ﬁelds that appear in the electroweak theory, and we will
then present their interactions, as we know them nowadays from the
Standard Model. We will ﬁnally see that in the low-energy limit weak
interactions are described by a four-fermion theory, which is the Fermi
theory of weak interactions, with the so-called V − A structure of the
currents proposed by Feynman and Gell-Mann.

8.2

Charged and neutral currents in the
Standard Model

The fermions that appear in the Standard Model are the leptons and
the quarks. The leptons are organized into three families: the electron
e and its neutrino νe , the muon µ and its neutrino νµ , and the τ and
its neutrino ντ . Similarly the quarks are organized into three families:
u and d, c and s, t and b. In units of |e|, the quarks u, c, t have electric
charge +2/3 while d, s, b have −1/3. For the antiparticles the charge is
¯ s̄, b̄ have charge +1/3. We
reversed, and ū, c̄, t̄ have charge −2/3 while d,
denote by e the Dirac spinor describing the electron and the positron,
by µ the Dirac spinor describing µ± , etc. We denote by eL , eR the Dirac
spinors
1 − γ5
1 + γ5
e,
eR =
e,
(8.8)
eL =
2
2
and similarly for all other particles. Therefore eL,R are the Weyl spinors
written in a four-component Dirac notation. Neglecting the possibility
of neutrino masses, the neutrinos have only the left-handed component
νL , and we will use a Dirac notation for them, with a Dirac spinor ν
that satisﬁes (1/2)(1 − γ 5 )ν = ν, see eq. (3.93).
Nowadays we understand the Fermi theory as a low-energy limit of
the Standard Model, so we will give the full structure of the interaction
in terms of leptons and quarks that derives from the Standard Model.

198 The low-energy limit of the electroweak theory

The charged leptonic current is deﬁned as
1
Jl−,µ = √ (ēL γ µ νe,L + µ̄L γ µ νµ,L + τ̄L γ µ ντ,L ) .
2

(8.9)

The operator ē creates an electron or destroys a positron, so it lowers
the charge by one unit, while νe destroys a neutrino or creates an antineutrino. Since the electric charge of the neutrino is zero, Jl−,µ is an
operator that lowers the electric charge by one unit, and is therefore
called a charged current. Its hermitian conjugate is
1
Jl+,µ = √ (ν̄e,L γ µ eL + ν̄µ,L γ µ µL + ν̄τ,L γ µ τL ) ,
2

(8.10)

and raises the charge by one unit. Observe that, for any spinor Ψ, the
deﬁnition ΨL = (1/2)(1 − γ 5 )Ψ implies Ψ†L = Ψ† (1/2)(1 − γ 5 ) since γ 5
is hermitian, and therefore Ψ̄L = Ψ̄(1/2)(1 + γ 5), since γ 0 anticommutes
with γ 5 . Furthermore from (γ 5 )2 = 1, it follows that

2 

1 − γ5
1 − γ5
=
.
(8.11)
2
2
Therefore we can write
1 + γ5 µ 1 − γ5
1 − γ5 2
1
γ
e = ν̄e γ µ (
) e = ν̄e γ µ (1 − γ 5 )e ,
2
2
2
2
(8.12)
and similarly for all other terms. The charged current is therefore proportional to the vector current minus the axial current.1 This is referred
to as the “V − A” structure of the charged weak currents.
Similarly, there is a quark charged current, which mediates transitions
between hadronic states. Its explicit form in terms of quarks is quite
similar2 to the form of the leptonic current,
ν̄e,L γ µ eL = ν̄e

1

The vector and axial current, and
their relations with vector and axial
U (1) symmetries, were discussed in Section 3.4.3.
2

Quark ﬁelds also have a color index,
as we will see in Chapter 10. All the
currents that we will consider in this
chapter are color singlets, i.e. the color
index in the bilinears is simply summed
over, and we do not write it explicitly.


1 
Jh−,µ = √ d¯L γ µ uL + s̄L γ µ cL + b̄L γ µ tL .
2

(8.13)

Here (d , s , b ) are linear combinations of (d, s, b). In a ﬁrst approximation b  b, while
d = d cos θC + s sin θC ,
s = −d sin θC + s cos θC ,

(8.14)
(8.15)

and θC is known as the Cabibbo angle. Numerically, sin θC = 0.220(3).
If we include also the (small) mixing of the b quark, the 3 × 3 matrix
relating (d , s , b ) to (d, s, b) is called the Cabibbo–Kobayashi–Maskawa
(CKM) matrix.
The total charged current is therefore
J −,µ = Jl−,µ + Jh−,µ ,

(8.16)

and its hermitian conjugate is denoted J +,µ . Even if eqs. (8.9) and
(8.13) are formally similar, there is an important diﬀerence. When we

8.2

Charged and neutral currents in the Standard Model 199

compute weak decays the initial and ﬁnal states will be leptons and
hadrons, rather then leptons and quarks. Hadrons are bound states
of quarks, held together by complicated non-perturbative QCD eﬀects.
Therefore, while the matrix element of the leptonic current between
leptonic states can be computed explicitly, we are not able to compute
the matrix element of the quark current between hadronic states because
we are not able to write a wave function of the hadronic states in terms
of the constituent quarks. The best we can do (unless we resort to nonperturbative techniques beyond the scope of this book) is to parametrize
them using symmetry principles. We will give many explicit examples
of these computations in the Solved Problems section.
Beside charged currents, there are also neutral currents. Restricting
to the ﬁrst family (the other families just give a replication), the neutral
lepton current is
Jl0,µ = a1 ν̄e,L γ µ νe,L + a2 ēL γ µ eL + a3 ēR γ µ eR ,

(8.17)

and the neutral quark current is
Jh0,µ = b1 ūL γ µ uL + b2 ūR γ µ uR + b3 d¯L γ µ dL + b4 d¯R γ µ dR .

(8.18)

The Standard Model predicts the coeﬃcients ai , bi in terms of a single
parameter θW called the Weinberg angle,
a1 =

1
,
2

1
a2 = − + sin2 θW ,
2

a3 = sin2 θW ,

(8.19)

and
1 2
− sin2 θW
2 3
1 1
b3 = − + sin2 θW
2 3
b1 =

2
b2 = − sin2 θW
3
1
b4 = sin2 θW .
3

(8.20)

The experimental value3 of the Weinberg angle is sin2 θW = 0.23120(15).
The total neutral current is
J 0,µ = Jl0,µ + Jh0,µ .

(8.21)

In the Standard Model the charged and neutral currents are coupled
to the vector ﬁelds Wµ± and Zµ0 respectively, with an interaction Lagrangian given by
Lint = g(Wµ+ J +,µ + Wµ− J −,µ ) + ḡ Zµ0 J 0,µ .

(8.22)

Observe that the left- and right-handed spinors enter the theory in an
asymmetric way. The charged currents, in particular, depend only on
the left-handed spinors. In the neutral currents we also have the righthanded electron eR but its coupling is diﬀerent from the coupling of
eL , see eqs. (8.17) and (8.19). This means that parity is broken by
weak interactions, both in processes mediated by charged currents and

3

Actually, the precise deﬁnition of
θW depends on the renormalization
scheme. This is the value in the socalled MS scheme.

200 The low-energy limit of the electroweak theory

νµ
µ
νe
W

e
Fig. 8.2 The decay µ− → e− ν̄e νµ .

in processes mediated by neutral currents. The two gauge couplings g
and ḡ are related by
g
,
(8.23)
ḡ =
cos θW
and g is related to the electric charge by |e| = g sin θW . The bosons W ±
and Z 0 are massive: mW = 80.425(38) GeV and mZ = 91.1876(21)
GeV. We will study in Section 11.4 the mechanism that generates the
masses for these gauge bosons. In any case, when we study the decay
of particles like the muon (with mµ  105 MeV) or the pions (with
mπ±  140 MeV), etc., the masses mW , mZ are much larger than the
energy scales involved, and therefore we are in a situation similar to
that examined in Section 8.1: the interaction, that at a fundamental
level is described by the exchange of the W ± , Z 0 bosons, is described at
an eﬀective level by a four-fermion Lagrangian.
To be speciﬁc, let us study the muon decay, µ− → e− ν̄e νµ . At the
fundamental level, the interaction is mediated by the W − boson as in
Fig. 8.2. From the form (8.10) of the current and (8.22) of the Lagrangian we see that at the ﬁrst vertex the relevant term in the interaction Lagrangian is
g
√ (ν̄µ,L γ µ µL ) Wµ+ ,
(8.24)
2
which destroys the incoming µ− , creates a νµ and creates a W − (the
operator W − can destroy a boson W − or create a boson W + , while the
operator W + , which is its hermitian conjugate, can destroy a boson W +
or create a boson W − ). Similarly, at the second vertex the relevant term
in the interaction Lagrangian is
g
√ (ēL γ µ νe,L ) Wµ− .
(8.25)
2
The propagator of the W boson turns out to be


−i
qµ qν
D̃µν (q) = 2
−
.
(8.26)
η
µν
q − m2W + i
m2W
For our present purposes the derivation of this result is not necessary,
and the only important point is that, when all masses of the initial and
ﬁnal particles are much smaller than mW , this reduces to
i
D̃µν  2 ηµν .
(8.27)
mW
This result is easily understood by comparison with the propagator of a
massive scalar particle, i/(q 2 − M 2 ) → −i/M 2 . The spatial components
Wµ with µ = 1, 2, 3, at low energies, have the same propagator as a
scalar ﬁeld, while Wµ=0 , as usual, has the “wrong” sign.
We can now compute the amplitude for the muon decay. Since mW
mµ , me ,


2 
5
i
1 − γ5
g
ν1−γ
u(µ)
v(νe )
η
iMf i  −i √
ū(νµ )γ µ
µν ū(e)γ
2
2
mW
2
2


g2
= −i 2 ū(νµ )γ µ (1 − γ 5 )u(µ) ū(e)γµ (1 − γ 5 )v(νe ) , (8.28)
8mW

8.2

Charged and neutral currents in the Standard Model 201

where u, v, ū are the appropriate wave functions, and we have written
the current in the V − A form using eq. (8.12). The Fermi constant GF
is deﬁned by
g2
GF
√ =
.
(8.29)
8m2W
2
We see that the amplitude Mf i in eq. (8.28) can be derived directly
from the eﬀective Lagrangian


GF
(8.30)
L = − √ ν̄µ γ µ (1 − γ 5 )µ ēγµ (1 − γ 5 )νe .
2
The same reasoning can be made for all other processes mediated by
the W boson. Therefore, the total eﬀective Lagrangian for processes
involving charged currents is
GF
LF = − √ jµ† j µ ,
2
where j µ = jlµ + jhµ ,
jlµ =



l̄γ µ (1 − γ 5 )νl ,

(8.31)

(8.32)

l=e,µ,τ

and
jhµ = d¯ γ µ (1 − γ 5 )u + s̄ γ µ (1 − γ 5 )c + b̄ γ µ (1 − γ 5 )t .

(8.33)

by J µ , deﬁned in eqs. (8.10) and (8.13), by
(Observe that j µ diﬀer √
a normalization factor 2 2.) Equation (8.31) is known as the Fermi
Lagrangian.4
The same analysis can be repeated for the neutral currents. In this
case the coupling g is replaced by ḡ, see eq. (8.22), and mW by mZ . The
masses mW and mZ are related by mW = mZ cos θW (see Section 11.4).
Using eq. (8.23), we see that ḡ 2 /m2Z = g 2 /m2W , and we ﬁnd
4GF
Lneutral = − √ Jµ0 J 0,µ ,
2

(8.34)

with J 0,µ given in eqs. (8.17), (8.18) and (8.21).5 It can be convenient to
change the normalization also for the neutral currents. We then write
jl0,µ = a1 ν̄e γ µ (1 − γ 5 )νe + a2 ēγ µ (1 − γ 5 )e + a3 ēγ µ (1 + γ 5 )e , (8.35)
and
jh0,µ = b1 ūγ µ (1 − γ 5 )u + b2 ūγ µ (1 + γ 5 )u
¯ µ (1 − γ 5 )d + b4 dγ
¯ µ (1 + γ 5 )d ,
+b3 dγ

(8.36)

with ai , bi still given by eqs. (8.19) and (8.20). Then jµ0 = 2Jµ0 and the
Lagrangian for neutral currents reads
GF
Lneutral = − √ jµ0 j 0,µ .
2

(8.37)

In the next section we will use these eﬀective Lagrangians to compute
explicitly a number of weak decays.

4

The original Fermi theory, proposed
in the 1930s to explain beta decay, contained only vector currents and obviously it was formulated in terms of
proton and neutron ﬁelds rather than
quarks. Here we have presented the
full structure, as we understand it today from the Standard Model. See, e.g.
(Weinberg), vol. II, Chapter 21 for references on the discovery of the Standard Model.

5
Writing the Lagrangian (8.34) we have
taken into account that each given neutral current process gets two contributions from Jµ0 J 0,µ . E.g. in the process eL ēL → νL ν̄L we can pick the
term eL ēL from the ﬁrst factor Jµ0 and
νL ν̄L from the second factor J 0,µ , or
vice versa. This does not happen in
the charged current Lagrangian, where
we have a current times its hermitian
conjugate, rather than a current times
itself as in eq. (8.34).

202 The low-energy limit of the electroweak theory

8.3

Solved problems: weak decays

Problem 8.1. µ− → e− ν̄e νµ
This exercise is a prototype of many similar calculations and we perform it
in great detail. We already computed the matrix element for the decay in
eq. (8.28). At lowest order in the Fermi coupling,
˜ˆ
˜
GF ˆ
Mf i = − √ ν̄µ γ µ (1 − γ 5 )µ ēγµ (1 − γ 5 )νe .
2

(8.38)

We denote the wave functions of the initial and ﬁnal particles simply by the
name of the particle. This notation does not displays explicitly the information
of whether we had a particle or an antiparticle (i.e. whether the wave function
is u or v), but has the advantage of being lighter.
The complex conjugate of the matrix element is computed using (γ µ )† =
0 µ 0
γ γ γ and (γ 5 )† = γ 5 . For any two wave functions Ψ1 , Ψ2
”†
`
´∗ “
Ψ̄1 γ µ (1 − γ 5 )Ψ2 = Ψ†1 γ 0 γ µ (1 − γ 5 )Ψ2 = Ψ†2 (1 − γ 5 )(γ 0 γ µ γ 0 )γ 0 Ψ1
= Ψ̄2 γ µ (1 − γ 5 )Ψ1 .
Then

˜
˜ˆ
GF ˆ
M∗f i = − √ µ̄γ µ (1 − γ 5 )νµ ν̄e γµ (1 − γ 5 )e
2

(8.39)

(8.40)

and
˜ˆ
˜
˜ˆ
˜ˆ
G2F ˆ
ν̄µ γ µ (1 − γ 5 )µ µ̄γ ν (1 − γ 5 )νµ ēγµ (1 − γ 5 )νe ν̄e γν (1 − γ 5 )e .
2
(8.41)
We denote by k the four-momentum of the electron, p of the muon, q1 of ν̄e
and q2 of νµ . We average over the polarization of the initial muon and we
sum over the ﬁnal electron polarization, using eqs. (3.112) and (3.113). This
means that (writing explicitly the Dirac indices a, b) we replace
|Mf i |2 =

ea ēb → (k + me )ab ,
1
µa µ̄b → ( p + mµ )ab ,
2
(νe )a (ν̄e )b = (q 1 )ab ,

(8.43)

(νµ )a (ν̄µ )b = (q 2 )ab .

(8.45)

(8.42)

(8.44)

The last two equations follow automatically from the fact that the massless
neutrinos, written in a Dirac notation, have only left-handed components.
Substituting into eq. (8.41) we see that, in the product of the ﬁrst two brackets,
the structure of Dirac indices becomes cyclic,
˜ˆ
˜
ˆ
ν̄µ γ µ (1 − γ 5 )µ µ̄γ ν (1 − γ 5 )νµ
´
´
`
`
= (ν̄µ )a γ µ (1 − γ 5 ) ab µb µ̄c γ ν (1 − γ 5 ) cd (νµ )d
`
´
`
´
= [(νµ )d (ν̄µ )a ] γ µ (1 − γ 5 ) ab [µb µ̄c ] γ ν (1 − γ 5 ) cd
´ 1
´
`
`
→ (q 2 )da γ µ (1 − γ 5 ) ab ( p + mµ )bc γ ν (1 − γ 5 ) cd
2
˜
1 ˆ
= Tr q 2 γ µ (1 − γ 5 )( p + mµ )γ ν (1 − γ 5 ) .
(8.46)
2

8.3
The γ 5 factors can be simpliﬁed observing that
(1 − γ 5 )( p + mµ )γ ν (1 − γ 5 ) = p (1 + γ 5 )γ ν (1 − γ 5 ) + mµ (1 − γ 5 )γ ν (1 − γ 5 )
= p γ ν (1 − γ 5 )2 + mµ γ ν (1 + γ 5 )(1 − γ 5 )
= 2 p γ ν (1 − γ 5 ) ,

(8.47)

where we used the fact that (1 − γ ) = 2(1 − γ ) while (1 + γ )(1 − γ ) = 0.
The product of the last two brackets in eq. (8.41) is treated similarly, and we
ﬁnd
ˆ
˜ ˆ
˜
(8.48)
|Mf i |2 = G2F Tr q 2 γ µ p γ ν (1 − γ 5 ) Tr q 1 γν k γµ (1 − γ 5 ) .
5 2

5

5

5

The traces are computed using the identities given in the Notation section,
that we recall here
Tr(γ µ γ ν ) = 4 η µν ,
µ ν

ρ σ

Tr(γ γ γ γ ) = 4 (η

µν ρσ

η

(8.49)
−η

µρ νσ

η

+η

µσ νρ

η ),

Tr(γ 5 γ µ γ ν γ ρ γ σ ) = −4i µνρσ .

(8.50)
(8.51)

As a result
|Mf i |2 = 16G2F pβ q2,α kρ q1σ (η αµ η βν − η αβ η µν + η αν η βµ + i αµβν )
×(ηρµ ησν − ηρσ ηµν + ηρν ηµσ + i ρµσν ) .

(8.52)

Performing the contractions, and using the identity
αµβν

α β
α β
ρµσν = −2(δρ δσ − δσ δρ ) ,

(8.53)

|Mf i |2 = 64G2F (pµ q1µ ) (kν q2ν ) .

(8.54)

we ﬁnally ﬁnd
We can now ﬁnd the decay rate using eq. (6.20). We work in the rest frame
of the muon. Then
1
|Mf i |2 dΦ(3)
(8.55)
dΓ =
2mµ
d3 k
d3 q1
d3 q2
32G2F
(2π)4 δ (4) (p − k − q1 − q2 )pµ q1µ kν q2ν ,
=
3
3
mµ (2π) 2Ek (2π) 2E1 (2π)3 2E2
0
= E1,2 . Experimentally, the neutrinos are of course
where we denote q1,2
much more diﬃcult to observe than the electron, so it is more common that
one is interested in the decay rate as a function of just the electron energy.
Then we integrate ﬁrst over q1 , q2 . Let us deﬁne q = p − k. We must compute
Z 3
d q1 d3 q2 (4)
δ (q − q1 − q2 )q1µ q2ν .
(8.56)
I µν (q) ≡
E1 E2

It is not necessary to compute all the components of I µν (q) separately. Lorentz
invariance dictates that the most general form of I µν (q) is
I µν (q) = A(q 2 )η µν + B(q 2 )

qµ qν
.
q2

(8.57)

Taking the trace, Iµµ = 4A + B, while qµ qν I µν = q 2 (A + B), so it suﬃces to
compute Iµµ and qµ qν I µν to have A, B and therefore the full tensor I µν (q).
We compute ﬁrst
Z 3
d q1 d3 q2 (4)
δ (q − q1 − q2 )(q1 q2 ) ,
(8.58)
Iµµ =
E1 E2

Solved problems: weak decays 203

204 The low-energy limit of the electroweak theory
where (q1 q2 ) denotes the scalar product q1,µ q2µ . The Dirac delta gives q =
q1 + q2 and therefore q 2 = q12 + q22 + 2(q1 q2 ) = 2(q1 q2 ), since for massless
neutrinos q12 = q22 = 0. Then
Z 3
Z
d q1 d3 q2 (4)
d3 q1
q2
q2
δ (q − q1 − q2 ) =
δ(q 0 − E1 − E2 ) . (8.59)
Iµµ =
2
E1 E2
2
E1 E2
Since Iµµ is Lorentz invariant, we can compute it in the frame that we prefer; in
particular, in the center-of-mass frame of the two neutrinos, we have E 1 = E2
and therefore
Z
Z
E12 dE1 dΩ
q2
q2
q0
1
0
4π
dE1 δ(E1 − ) = πq 2 . (8.60)
Iµµ =
δ(q
−2E
)
=
1
2
2
E1
2
2
2
To compute qµ qν I µν we again use the rest frame of the two neutrinos, so that
q = (q 0 , 0) (and therefore (q 0 )2 = q 2 ) and (q1 q) = E1 q 0 , (q2 q) = E2 q 0 . Then
Z 3
d q1 d3 q2 (4)
qµ qν I µν =
δ (q − q1 − q2 )(q1 q)(q2 q)
E E2
Z 1
(8.61)
= q02
d3 q1 d3 q2 δ (4) (q − q1 − q2 )
Z
= q2
d3 q1 δ(q 0 − 2E1 )
Z
1
q0
= q2
E12 dE1 dΩ δ(E1 − )
2
2
π
= q4 ,
2
where of course q 4 is a notation for (q 2 )2 . We therefore ﬁnd A, B and
I µν (q) =

π 2 µν
(q η + 2q µ q ν ) .
6

(8.62)

We insert this into eq. (8.55) and, since me  mµ , we set for simplicity the
electron mass to zero. Then we ﬁnd, in the muon rest frame,
dΓ =

˜
G2F Ek2 dEk dΩ ˆ 2
q (pk) + 2(qp)(qk) .
48π 4 mµ
Ek

(8.63)

In the muon rest frame p = (mµ , 0), so pk = mµ Ek ; since q = p − k, we have:
qp = p2 −pk = m2µ −mµ Ek ; q 2 = (p−k)2 = p2 +k2 −2pk = m2µ −2mµ Ek ; and
ﬁnally, qk = pk−k 2 = mµ Ek . We insert these expressions into eq. (8.63). The
integration over dΩ simply gives a factor 4π, since the integrand is independent
of the angles, and we ﬁnally ﬁnd
G2F
dΓ
=
E 2 (3m2µ − 4mµ E) ,
dE
12π 3

(8.64)

where E = Ek is the electron energy. The minimum value of E is equal to
me  0, and corresponds to the kinematical conﬁguration where the electron
is at rest and the two neutrinos have equal and opposite momenta. The maximum value is obtained instead when the electron goes in one direction carrying
away half of the energy, and the two neutrinos are collinear, in the opposite
direction (see the discussion of three-body kinematics in Problem 6.1). Then
Emin = me  0 and Emax = mµ /2. Then, integrating eq. (8.64),
Γ

G2F m5µ
.
192π 3

(8.65)

8.3
Comparison with the muon lifetime allows us to determine the Fermi constant,
and one ﬁnds (after a more accurate theoretical computation that includes
electromagnetic loop corrections in which a photon is exchanged between the
electron and the muon)
GF = 1.16637(1) × 10−5 GeV−2 .

(8.66)

Problem 8.2. π + → l+ νl
We consider the decay of the charged pion π + into a lepton l+ and its neutrino
νl , with l = e, µ (the τ lepton has mτ  1777 MeV and therefore is heavier
¯ Using eqs. (8.31), (8.32) and
than the pion). In terms of quarks, π + = ud.
(8.33) the relevant interaction term is
´`
´
GF `
ν̄l γµ (1 − γ 5 )l d¯ γ µ (1 − γ 5 )u .
LF = − √
2

(8.67)

Furthermore, from eq. (8.14), we have d = d cos θC + s sin θC and only the
term d cos θC is relevant for this process. Therefore we use
LF = −

´` µ
´
GF cos θC `
¯ (1 − γ 5 )u .
√
ν̄l γµ (1 − γ 5 )l dγ
2

(8.68)

In Chapter 5 we derived the LSZ formula, which gives the matrix element of the
operator iT (related to the S matrix by S = 1+iT ), in the case where the ﬁelds
that appear in the Lagrangian describe the particles that we see in the initial
and ﬁnal states. We then saw that a ﬁeld φ(x) describing the annihilation
of an initial particle with four-momentum ki brings a factor e−iki x , while a
ﬁeld φ(x) describing the creation of a ﬁnal particle with four-momentum p j
brings a factor e+ipj x (together with the appropriate spinor wave functions
for spin-1/2 particles, or polarization vectors for spin-1 particles, as discussed
in Section 5.5.4). Upon integration over d4 x, these exponential factors gave
(2π)4 δ (4) (Pi − Pf ), which expresses energy–momentum conservation. The
matrix element iMf i was deﬁned extracting this Dirac delta from the matrix
element of iT , see eq. (5.98).
Here the situation is slightly diﬀerent, because in the Lagrangian we have
the quark ﬁelds but in the initial state we instead have the pion. To extract energy–momentum conservation we must come back to our derivation
and be Rmore general. In the interaction picture, the evolution operator is
exp{−i d4 xHint (x)} and therefore we are interested in the matrix element
of this operator between the initial and ﬁnal state. To ﬁrst order we are
interested in
Z
(8.69)
−i d4 x f |Hint (x)|i
where we denote by |i and |f  the initial and ﬁnal states, respectively. We
now use the fact that, if P̂ µ is the space-time translation operator, we have
Hint (x) = eiP̂ x Hint (0)e−iP̂ x .

(8.70)

Inserting this into eq. (8.69), we ﬁnd
Z
Z
−i d4 x f |eiP̂ x Hint (0)e−iP̂ x |i = −i d4 x ei(Pf −Pi )x f |Hint (0)|i
= −i(2π)4 δ (4) (Pf − Pi ) f |Hint (0)|i . (8.71)

Solved problems: weak decays 205

206 The low-energy limit of the electroweak theory
We see that energy–momentum conservation is a general consequence of spacetime translation invariance, as it should be. Of course, the same manipulations can be performed on arbitrary powers of Hint (x) and therefore the Dirac
delta is extracted in this way to all orders in perturbation theory. The factor
(2π)4 δ (4) (Pf −Pi ) is reabsorbed in the deﬁnition of Mf i , and we see that Mf i
is determined by the matrix element of the interaction Hamiltonian density
evaluated at x = 0.
Coming back to our problem (and observing that in Fermi theory in the
interaction Lagrangian there are no derivatives, and therefore Lint = −Hint ),
the matrix element between the initial pion state and the ﬁnal lνl state is
˜
ˆ µ
˜
GF cos θC + ˆ
¯ (1 − γ 5 )u (0)|π + 
√
l νl | ν̄l γµ (1 − γ 5 )l (0) dγ
(8.72)
2
˜
ˆ µ
˜
GF cos θC + ˆ
¯ (1 − γ 5 )u (0)|π +  ,
√
=−
l νl | ν̄l γµ (1 − γ 5 )l (0)|0 0| dγ
2

Mf i = −

with the currents evaluated at x = 0. The leptonic matrix element is easily
computed,
ˆ
˜
l+ νl | ν̄l γµ (1 − γ 5 )l (0)|0 = ū(νl )γµ (1 − γ 5 )v(l) ,

6

Since the quarks do not appear as free
particles, there are subtleties in how
their masses are deﬁned. We will not
enter into these issues.

7

In principle, matrix elements of the
electroweak currents (often called simply “weak matrix elements”) can be
computed with numerical simulations
in lattice gauge theory. In practice, despite much progress, there are still technical diﬃculties and one is limited by
computer power.

(8.73)

where, as usual, ū and v are the spinor wave functions. However, the matrix
element of the quark current between the pion state and the vacuum cannot
be computed like this. First of all, the quarks inside the pions of course
are not free particles. The situation is further complicated by the fact that
the interaction that conﬁnes the quarks inside the pions cannot be treated
perturbatively. This can be understood comparing the bound state of quarks
with the simplest example of bound state that we know, the hydrogen atom.
The hydrogen atom is a bound state of an electron and a proton, and its
total mass is mp + me − (binding energy). The binding energy in the ground
state is the Rydberg, (1/2)me α2 , and since α  1 it is a small correction
compared to me and therefore to the mass mp + me of the free system. This
is what we expect in a system in which the interaction term can be treated
perturbatively. If this were the case also in QCD, we should expect that mπ is
equal to mu plus md minus a small binding energy. However, this expectation
is completely wrong. The u and d quarks have masses6 of the order of a few
MeV, while mπ+  140 MeV. Therefore the contribution of the masses of the
constituent quarks to the total pion mass is completely negligible! Almost
the totality of the pion mass comes from the energy of the gluon ﬁeld (the
QCD analog of the photon ﬁeld) created by the u and d quarks, as well as
from vacuum ﬂuctuations involving creation of quark–antiquark pairs. These
are complicated non-perturbative eﬀects and, at the level of this book, we are
unable to compute them.7
The fact that we are unable to compute the matrix element of the hadronic
current does not mean that we cannot proceed further. In fact, similarly to
the electromagnetic form factors discussed in Problem 7.2, Lorentz covariance dictates the most general form of the matrix element, so we can at least
parametrize it, in such a way that all our ignorance is hidden in a few quantities. In the case of the pion decay the parametrization is rather simple. The
¯ µ (1 − γ 5 )u|π +  is a Lorentz four-vector. The pion state
matrix element 0|dγ
is described by its four-momentum pµ
π and by nothing else, since the pion has
spin zero. Therefore pµ
π is the only four-vector on which this matrix element
depends and, no matter what complicated computation we perform, the result

8.3
must be proportional to pµ
π . Therefore we can write
˜
ˆ µ
¯ (1 − γ 5 )u (0)|π +  = −fπ pµπ ,
0| dγ

Solved problems: weak decays 207

(8.74)

where fπ is a proportionality constant, and the minus sign is a convention
in the deﬁnition of fπ . In general fπ will be a function of all the Lorentz
invariant quantities on which the matrix element depends. But again, the
only four-vector on which the matrix element depends is pµ
π , and having only
pµπ at our disposal the only Lorentz invariant quantity that we can construct
is p2π . However p2π = m2π is a constant and therefore also fπ is a constant. It
is called the pion decay constant, and all our ignorance on the inner structure
of the pion is hidden in it.8
It is also instructive to look separately at the contributions of the vector and
axial current in eq. (8.74). The pion is a pseudoscalar, i.e. it has intrinsic par¯ µ u|π + .
ity −1. Consider ﬁrst the matrix element of the vector current, 0|dγ
µ
¯
Under a parity transformation dγ u transforms as a true four-vector, but the
matrix element picks an extra minus sign due to the intrinsic parity of the
pion. Therefore, overall, the matrix element of the vector current between a
pion state and the vacuum is a pseudo-four-vector, and conversely the matrix
element of the axial current is a true four-vector. The value of the matrix
element is determined by the strong interaction, which conserves parity. This
means that the parametrization of the matrix element must hold also in the
parity-transformed frame, and therefore a true vector must be equated to a
true vector and a pseudovector to a pseudovector. Since pµ
π is a true fourvector, and there is no pseudovector at our disposal, in eq. (8.74) the two
separate contributions are
` µ 5 ´
` µ ´
¯ γ u (0)|π +  = fπ pµ
¯ u (0)|π +  = 0 ,
(8.75)
0| dγ
0| dγ
π,

8
The deﬁnition of fπ in the literature
can
√ sometime diﬀer by a factor of 2 or of
2 from the one that we have adopted.

and therefore all the contribution comes from the axial current.
The rest of the computation is straightforward. Plugging eqs. (8.73) and
(8.74) into eq. (8.72) we ﬁnd
Mf i =

GF fπ cos θC
√
ū(νl ) pπ (1 − γ 5 )v(l) .
2

(8.76)

We write pπ = pl + pν , where pl and pν are the four-momenta of the lepton
and of the neutrino, respectively. Then
ū(νl ) pπ (1 − γ 5 )v(l) = ū(νl ) pν (1 − γ 5 )v(l) + ū(νl )(1 + γ 5 ) pl v(l)

(8.77)

and we use fact that ū, v satisfy the Dirac equations (3.114) and (3.101).
Therefore
GF fπ cos θC
√
ml ū(νl )(1 + γ 5 )v(l) .
(8.78)
Mf i = −
2
Observe that the amplitude vanishes if ml = 0. This can be understood
observing that the charged weak currents depend only on the left-handed
spinors, as in ν̄l,L γ µ lL . As discussed in Section 4.2.2, in the massless limit a
left-handed operator describes a particle with h = −1/2 and its antiparticle
with h = +1/2. Therefore the neutrino νl in the ﬁnal state of the π + decay
is left-handed, h = −1/2. Since the pion has spin zero, conservation of momentum and of angular momentum requires that also the antilepton l + has
negative helicity h = −1/2, see Fig. 8.3. However, the antilepton l + is created
by the left-handed Weyl ﬁeld that appears in the weak charged current and
therefore, according to the discussion in Section 4.2.2, in the massless limit

π+
l

+

νl

Fig. 8.3 The decay π + → l+ νl . The

momenta of the particles are denoted by dashed lines and the spin
by the large arrows.

208 The low-energy limit of the electroweak theory
it is a pure h = +1/2 state. Therefore in the massless limit the process is
forbidden because it would violate angular momentum conservation.
Even if the contribution comes only from the spin conﬁguration with negative helicities for both the neutrino and the antilepton it is still convenient,
in the computation of |Mf i |2 , to formally sum over all spins with the usual
rules given in eqs. (3.112) and (3.113), uū → pν , vv̄ → ( pl − ml ), since these
rules are completely general. To compute M∗f i we use
˜†
ˆ
(8.79)
ū(1 + γ 5 )v = v̄(1 − γ 5 )u .
Then
˜
G2F fπ2 cos2 θC 2 ˆ
ml Tr ( pl − ml )(1 − γ 5 ) pν (1 + γ 5 )
2
= G2F fπ2 cos2 θC m2l Tr [ pl pν ] = 4G2F fπ2 cos2 θC m2l (pl pν ) . (8.80)

|Mf i |2 =

We have used (1 − γ 5 ) pν (1 + γ 5 ) = pν (1 + γ 5 )2 = 2 pν (1 + γ 5 ) and the identity
˜
ˆ
(8.81)
Tr γ µ γ ν γ 5 = 0 .
(The ﬁrst non-vanishing trace involving the matrix γ 5 is the trace of the
product of γ 5 with four matrices γ µ .) In the pion rest frame, pπ = (mπ , 0);
using pl = pπ − pν , we have pl pν = pπ pν − p2ν = mπ Eν . Therefore
|Mf i |2 = 4G2F fπ2 cos2 θC m2l mπ Eν

(8.82)

and, in the pion rest frame,
1
4G2F fπ2 cos2 θC m2l mπ Eν dΦ(2)
2mπ
d3 p ν
d3 p l
(2π)4 δ (4) (pπ − pl − pν )
= G2F fπ2 cos2 θC m2l
3
(2π) 2El (2π)3
G2 f 2 cos2 θC m2l d3 pl
δ(mπ − El − Eν ) .
= F π
8π 2
El

dΓ =

(8.83)

Using pl dpl = El dEl , we write d3 pl = p2l dpl dΩ = pl El dEl dΩ = (El2 −
m2l )1/2 El dEl dΩ. Integrating over the solid angle, we ﬁnd
«
„
q
q
G2 f 2 cos2 θC m2l
El2 − m2l dEl δ El + El2 − m2l − mπ . (8.84)
dΓ = F π
2π
The Dirac delta has only one zero, at El = (m2π + m2l )/(2mπ ) ≡ E0 . Using
the identity δ(f (E)) = (1/|f  (E0 )|)δ(E − E0 ), we ﬁnally ﬁnd
„
«2
m2
G2 f 2 cos2 θC 2
ml mπ 1 − 2l
.
(8.85)
Γ(π + → l+ νl ) = F π
8π
mπ
The parameter fπ can be ﬁxed comparing the rate Γ(π + → µ+ νµ ) with the
experimental value. Taking into account that cos θC  0.97, one ﬁnds fπ 
130 MeV.
If we look at the branching ratio Γ(π + → e+ νe )/Γ(π + → µ+ νµ ) the parameter fπ cancels and we get the prediction
„
«2
Γ(π + → e+ νe )
m2e 1 − m2e /m2π
 1.28 × 10−4 .
(8.86)
=
Γ(π + → µ+ νµ )
m2µ 1 − m2µ /m2π
This can be compared to the experimental value, which is 1.230(4)×10−4 . We
see that this lowest-order calculation already gives agreement at a level of a few

8.3
per cent. This is the best that we could expect; for instance, electromagnetic
corrections due to the exchange of a photon between the pion and the ﬁnal
lepton modify the matrix element by a factor 1 + O(α) and therefore give a
correction of the order of a few per cent.
Complement: Isospin and ﬂavor SU (3)
Here we examine some symmetries of strong interactions, and their eﬀects on
the vector and axial quark currents. We will then use these results in the next
problem, when we will need the quark currents in the computation of a weak
matrix element involving hadrons. Consider the currents
µ
= q̄a γ µ qb ,
Vab

µ 5
Aµ
ab = q̄a γ γ qb

(8.87)

where q is the Dirac ﬁeld describing a quark and the indices a, b label the type
of quark (u, d, s, . . .) and is called a ﬂavor index. Consider at ﬁrst free quarks,
so that they satisfy the free Dirac equation, i ∂qa = ma qa , and its hermitian
conjugate i∂µ q̄a γ µ = −ma q̄a . Then
µ
= i(ma − mb )q̄a qb ,
∂µ Vab

5
∂µ Aµ
ab = i(ma + mb )q̄a γ qb .

(8.88)

We see that in the limit in which all quark masses are zero, both the axial
and vector currents are conserved; if instead the masses are non-zero but two
or more of them are degenerate, still the corresponding vector currents are
conserved, at the level of the free theory. We can trace this to the existence
of a symmetry in the free Lagrangian for N quark ﬂavors,
Lfree =

N
X

[iq̄a ∂qa − ma q̄a qa ] .

(8.89)

a=1

Consider in fact the global transformation
qa → Uab qb

(8.90)

where Uab is a U (N ) matrix in ﬂavor space. Since U acts only on ﬂavor
space and is a global transformation (i.e. it is independent of x) it commutes
both with the γ matrices and with the derivatives. Therefore, under (8.90),
q̄ ∂q → q̄U † U ∂q = q̄ ∂q, so the kinetic term is invariant. Instead, a generic mass
term does not respect this symmetry. In fact, if M is the matrix in ﬂavor space
with matrix elements Mab = ma δab , the mass term in the Lagrangian can be
written in matrix form as q̄M q, and under eq. (8.90) it becomes q̄U † M U q. A
generic U (N ) matrix U does not commute with M , unless M is proportional
to the identity matrix. Therefore we have a U (N ) symmetry only when N
masses are equal. The corresponding conserved currents are just the vector
µ
. Consider now the transformation
currents Vab
“ 5 ”
qa → eiγ β
qb
(8.91)
ab

c

c

where β = βc T , T are the U (N ) generators and βc the U (N ) parameters. In
other words, the transformation matrix is UL = exp{−iβ} on the left-handed
quarks and UR = UL† on the right-handed quarks. Equations (8.90) and (8.91)
are the generalization to N ﬂavors of the vector and chiral transformations
discussed in Section 3.4.3. The chiral transformation (8.91) is still a symmetry
5
5
of the kinetic term. In fact, as in Section 3.4.3, we use γ µ eiγ β = −eiγ β γ µ ,
which follows from {γ 5 , γ µ } = 0. Then, performing the transformation on

Solved problems: weak decays 209

210 The low-energy limit of the electroweak theory
the kinetic terms, in order to bring U † near U and use U † U = 1 we must
anticommute it twice with γ matrices, once with the γ 0 implicit in q̄ and the
second time with γ µ . Therefore we pick a minus sign twice, and the kinetic
term is invariant. In the mass term, instead, even if all the masses are equal,
so that we have the structure q̄q, we must anticommute only once, with the
γ 0 implicit in q̄. Therefore the mass term picks a minus sign, and it is not
invariant. So, the axial symmetry (8.91) is a symmetry only if all masses are
zero, and in this case their conserved currents are the axial currents Aµ
ab given
in eq. (8.87). We therefore understand why, when the masses are non-zero,
the divergence of the vector currents is proportional to the mass diﬀerence
while for the axial currents it is proportional to their sum.
Until now we have discussed these symmetries for the free quark Lagrangian.
However, we will see in Section 10.3 that the interaction term in QCD respects
these symmetries so, in strong interactions, the only non-invariant term in
the Lagrangian comes from the quark masses. In particular, the masses of
the u and d quarks are almost degenerate, mu  md . Therefore we have
an approximated global U (2) = U (1) × SU (2) vector symmetry, to which
correspond four conserved currents. The SU (2) part of this symmetry is called
isospin. The u, d quarks are an isospin doublet; u has (I = 1/2, Iz = +1/2)
while d has (I = 1/2, Iz = −1/2). All other quarks have isospin zero. The
three currents associated to isospin can be written compactly introducing the
notation
„
«
u
Q=
(8.92)
d
for the (u, d) doublet. As we recalled in Section 2.5, the generators of an SU (2)
group on a doublet are represented by one half times the Pauli matrices. These,
when they act in isospin space, are conventionally denoted by τ a rather than
σ a , so the isospin generators on the (u, d) doublet are written T a = τ a /2. The
SU (2) conserved currents can be written in the form
Vµa = Q̄γµ

τa
Q,
2

(8.93)

which shows that these currents are an SU (2) triplet. Introducing the linear
combinations
„
«
„
«
1
1
0 1
0 0
,
τ − = (τ 1 − iτ 2 ) =
, (8.94)
τ + = (τ 1 + iτ 2 ) =
0 0
1 0
2
2
and Vµ± = Vµ1 ± iVµ2 , we see that
Vµ+ = ūγµ d ,

¯ µu ,
Vµ− = dγ

Vµ3 =

1
¯ µ d) .
(ūγµ u − dγ
2

(8.95)

The U (1) current is instead
µ
µ
¯
jU
(1) = Q̄γ Q = ūγµ u + dγµ d .

(8.96)

The electromagnetic current involving the u and d quarks is
µ
=
jem

2
1¯
ūγµ u − dγ
µd ,
3
3

(8.97)

since the u quark has a charge (2/3)|e| and the d quark has charge −(1/3)|e|;
µ
µ
3
jem
can be written as a linear combination of jU
(1) and of Vµ ,
µ
jem
=

1
τ3
Q̄γ µ Q + Q̄γ µ Q .
6
2

(8.98)

8.3
This shows that the electromagnetic interaction does not conserve isospin,
since this current is the sum of the isospin singlet Q̄γ µ Q, which induces transitions with ∆I = 0 and therefore conserves isospin, and of a term Q̄γ µ τ 3 Q
which instead induces transitions with |∆I| = 1 and ∆Iz = 0. An example of
the former is the decay ρ0 → π 0 γ, since both the ρ0 and the π 0 mesons have
isospin I = 1, Iz = 0. An example of the latter is the decay ρ0 → η 0 γ, since
the meson η 0 has isospin I = 0, or Σ0 → Λ0 γ, where Σ0 is a baryon with
I = 1, Iz = 0 and Λ0 is a baryon with I = 0.
From the form of the weak currents discussed in Section 8.2, we see that
isospin is violated also by weak interactions. We leave it as an instructive
exercise to classify the possible isospin violations in weak decays of hadrons,
both in semileptonic decays (i.e. when in the ﬁnal state there is another
hadron plus a lepton and its neutrino) and in non-leptonic decays, i.e. when
there is no lepton in the ﬁnal state.
When we have a symmetry, the corresponding charge is conserved. In nonrelativistic quantum mechanics, this means that the charge commutes with
the Hamiltonian; therefore we can diagonalize simultaneously the charge and
the Hamiltonian, and the energy eigenstates can be labeled by the value of
the charge. For instance, in a system invariant under spatial rotations, the
angular momentum is conserved and the states can be labeled by their energy
E, angular momentum J and by Jz . At each energy level we have 2J + 1
degenerate states, corresponding to the 2J + 1 possible values of Jz .
In QFT the situation is more complicated because it also depends on the behavior of the vacuum state under the symmetry transformation. There are two
possibilities: if the vacuum state is unique then it must be invariant under the
symmetry. If however it is degenerate, it is possible that a symmetry transformation sends it into a new vacuum state. The latter possibility corresponds to
spontaneous symmetry breaking, and will be discussed in Chapter 11, where
we will also explain why this possibility cannot take place in non-relativistic
quantum mechanics.
If the vacuum is non-degenerate, the situation is completely analogous to
non-relativistic quantum mechanics and the eigenstates of the Hamiltonian
(i.e. the particles) are labeled by the quantum numbers of the conserved
charge. In the case of isospin, each strongly interacting particle is labeled by
its isospin I and by Iz , and at each mass level we have 2Iz + 1 degenerate
hadronic states. Isospin is only an approximate symmetry of strong interactions because mu is not exactly equal to md , and is also violated by weak
and electromagnetic interactions, therefore the states are only approximately
degenerate. A comparison with the mass spectrum of hadrons made of u
and d quarks shows that the option chosen by Nature is indeed that the vacuum is invariant under isospin and hadrons are organized in isospin multiplets
with approximately degenerate masses. For examples the three pions have
mπ0  135 MeV and mπ±  140 MeV. The equality of the π + and π − masses
follows from the CPT theorem, as we saw in Section 4.2.3. However, the approximate equality with the π 0 mass is a consequence of isospin symmetry,
and we conclude that the three pions are an isospin triplet, i.e. they have
I = 1. Similarly the approximate equality of the proton and neutron masses,
mp  938.2 MeV, mn  939.5 MeV, is due to the fact that they are an isospin
doublet, i.e. they have I = 1/2.
The fact that isospin is an approximate symmetry, and therefore the vector current is approximately conserved, is sometimes referred to as the CVC

Solved problems: weak decays 211

212 The low-energy limit of the electroweak theory
(conserved vector current) approximation. In this approximation, the isospin
multiplets are exactly degenerate, so when one uses the CVC approximation
one must, by consistency, set mπ0 = mπ± , mp = mn , etc. in the calculation
of the amplitudes.
The approximation where mu and md are both set to zero is of course
less accurate, and it is known as PCAC (partially conserved axial current)
since in this limit also the axial currents are conserved. If the vacuum were
invariant under this approximate symmetry we should see a parity doubling
of the hadron spectrum. Since this is not the case, we must conclude that
either the approximate symmetry is not a good approximation at all, or it is
spontaneously broken. The latter option turns out to be the correct one.
Coming back to the vector symmetry, one can enlarge it to the next lightest
quark, which is the s quark, assuming that mu  md  ms . In this limit we
have an approximate SU (3) symmetry and particles are organized according
to the SU (3) representations. For example, the light pseudoscalar mesons are
in an octet, formed by the three pions, the four kaons K ± , K 0 , K̄ 0 and the
η meson. This symmetry is more approximate than isospin, as we see, e.g.
from the fact that the mass of K ± is mK  494 MeV, rather larger than the
pion masses. Still, the mass diﬀerences are smaller than the typical masses of
hadrons. Furthermore, a number of techniques exist for computing deviations
from the exact symmetry. The interested reader can see for instance Georgi
(1984).
Problem 8.3. K 0 → π − l+ νl

π−

d
d
K

u

0

νl

s
W

+

l

+

We now consider the decay of a spin-0 hadron into another spin-0 hadron, plus
a lepton l+ = e+ , µ+ and its neutrino. We will consider for deﬁniteness the
decay of the neutral kaon, K 0 → π − l+ νl , but the same type of computation
can be performed for, say, π + → π 0 e+ νe or for the beta decay of a spin-0
nucleus into another spin-0 nucleus. Decays where in the ﬁnal state there is
both a lepton–neutrino pair and a hadron are called semileptonic.
In terms of quarks, K 0 = ds̄ and π − = dū. At the quark level the transition
proceeds as shown in Fig. 8.4. The d quark is a “spectator”, while the quark s̄,
with electric charge +1/3 (in units of |e|) is transformed into a ū quark, with
charge −2/3, by the emission of a (virtual) W + boson which then decays into
l+ νl . The shaded blobs in the graph indicate that ds̄ and dū are complicated
bound states, rather than free quarks. The relevant hadronic current is, using
eqs. (8.33) and (8.14),

Fig. 8.4 The decay K 0 → π − l+ νl .

The shaded blobs indicate that
the hadrons are complicated bound
states of quarks.

jhµ = sin θC s̄γ µ (1 − γ 5 )u

(8.99)

and the relevant term in the Fermi Lagrangian is
LF = −

´`
´
GF sin θC `
√
ν̄l γµ (1 − γ 5 )l s̄γ µ (1 − γ 5 )u .
2

(8.100)

With the same steps discussed in Problem 8.2 we ﬁnd the matrix element
Mf i = −

GF sin θC
√
ū(νl )γµ (1 − γ 5 )v(l) π − |s̄γ µ (1 − γ 5 )u|K 0  ,
2

(8.101)

where it is understood that the current s̄γ µ (1 − γ 5 )u is evaluated at x = 0.
As in Problem 8.2, we parametrize the hadronic matrix element in the most
general form compatible with Lorentz invariance. Since both the pion and the
kaon have spin zero, the matrix element can depend only on their momenta,

8.3
that we denote pµπ and pµ
K , respectively. We introduce the combinations
µ
pµ = pµ
K + pπ ,

µ
q µ = pµ
K − pπ .

(8.102)

There is only one independent Lorentz scalar that we can construct with pµ
and q µ , which we take to be q 2 . In fact, qp = p2K − p2π = m2K − m2π is a
constant while, from their deﬁnitions, p2 = m2K + m2π + 2pK pπ and q 2 =
m2K + m2π − 2pK pπ . Therefore p2 + q 2 = 2(m2K + m2π ) and they are not
independent. So the most general parametrization of the hadronic matrix
element consistent with Lorentz invariance is
π − |s̄γ µ (1 − γ 5 )u|K 0  = f1 (q 2 )pµ + f2 (q 2 )q µ ,

(8.103)

with f1 , f2 functions of the only independent Lorentz scalar at our disposal.
They are the form factors for the process in question. All our ignorance of the
internal structure of the pion and of the kaon is hidden in these two functions.
A number of considerations allow us to simplify the problem further:
(i). The internal structure of the pion and of the kaon is determined by the
strong interactions, and strong interactions conserve time-reversal invariance.
We now show that invariance under time reversal implies that f1 (q 2 ) and
f2 (q 2 ) are relatively real.
The proof is as follows. We saw in Section 4.2.3 that time reversal is implemented by an anti-unitary operator T , i.e. by an operator that, given
two states |a and |b, satisﬁes
T a|T b˜= a|b∗ . Let |a = |π −  and |b =
ˆ
j µ (0)|K 0 , where j µ (x) = s̄γ µ (1 − γ 5 )u (x). Since |π −  is fully characterized
−
by the pion momentum pµ
π , we can rather use the notation |π  = |pπ . The
−
time-reversed state |T π  describes a pion with time-reversed four-momentum
µ
pπ = (p0π , −p π ), i.e. p π = η µµ pµ
π (with no sum over the µ index). Since at
the quantum level we also have the possibility of a phase, we write
|T pπ  = ηπ |pπ  .

(8.104)

Similarly, the time reversal of the state j µ (0)|K 0  is obtained changing the
µ
kaon momentum into p K = η µµ pµ
K and allowing for a phase ηK . At the same
time, under time reversal a current transforms as j µ (t, x ) → η µµ j µ (−t, x ),
therefore j µ (x = 0) → η µµ j µ (x = 0). In conclusion, the matrix element
that we denoted T a|T b is obtained from the matrix element a|b replacing
pµ → η µµ pµ , q µ → η µµ q µ and j µ (0) → η µµ j µ (0), and multiplying by the
relative phase ηrel = ηπ∗ ηK .
Since in our case T is a good symmetry, if the parametrization (8.103) holds
in a frame it must hold also in the time-reversed frame. Therefore the equation
T a|T b = a|b∗ translates into
`
´ `
´∗
ηrel η µµ f1 (q 2 )η µµ pµ + f2 (q 2 )η µµ q µ = f1 (q 2 )pµ + f2 (q 2 )q µ , (8.105)
where on the left-hand side the overall factor η µµ comes from the transformation of the current, and the factors η µµ inside the parentheses come from the
transformation of the momenta, and there is no sum over µ. Since, for each
µ, we have (η µµ )2 = 1, we ﬁnd
`
´
(8.106)
ηrel f1 (q 2 )pµ + f2 (q 2 )q µ = f1∗ (q 2 )pµ + f2∗ (q 2 )q µ .
This means that f1∗ (q 2 ) = ηrel f1 (q 2 ) and f2∗ (q 2 ) = ηrel f2 (q 2 ), i.e. f1 (q 2 ) and
f2 (q 2 ) pick the same phase ηrel (independent of q 2 ) under complex conjugation.
Apart from an overall phase, that is irrelevant when we take the modulus

Solved problems: weak decays 213

214 The low-energy limit of the electroweak theory
squared of the matrix element, we can then take f1 (q 2 ) and f2 (q 2 ) to be
simultaneously real.
(ii) Use of CVC. Since the pion and the kaon have the same intrinsic parity
(they are both pseudoscalars) only the vector current contributes to the matrix
element,
(8.107)
π − |[s̄γ µ γ 5 u](0)|K 0  = 0 ,
π − | [s̄γ µ u] (0)|K 0  = f1 (q 2 )pµ + f2 (q 2 )q µ .

(8.108)

(We have written explicitly that the current in the matrix element is evaluated at x = 0.) Let us now use the CVC approximation discussed in the
Complement on page 209. In this context, this means that we assume an approximate SU (3) ﬂavor symmetry, since it is only in this case that the vector
current involving the u and s quarks is conserved (of course isospin only provides the conservation of the currents involving the u and d quarks). Denoting
[s̄γ µ u] (x) = V µ (x), this means that we are assuming that ∂µ π − |V µ (x)|K 0  =
0. Using the fact that V µ (x) = eiP̂ x V µ (0)e−iP̂ x , we have
0 = ∂µ π − |eiP̂ x V µ (0)e−iP̂ x |K 0  = ∂µ e−i(pK −pπ )x π − |V µ (0)|K 0  .

(8.109)

Since pK − pπ = q we ﬁnd that, in the CVC approximation,
qµ π − |V µ (0)|K 0  = 0 .

(8.110)

Inserting the parametrization (8.108), this gives
f1 (q 2 )pq + f2 (q 2 )q 2 = 0 .

9

Of course, this approximation is made
only in the calculation of the matrix element, and gives the zeroth-order term
in an expansion of the matrix element
in powers of mK − mπ . We do not
set mK = mπ in the expression for the
phase space, since otherwise the decay
would be forbidden!

(8.111)

The scalar product pq = m2K − m2π is automatically zero within the CVC
approximation since, as we explained in the previous section, when we assume
an SU (3) ﬂavor symmetry we must set for consistency mK = mπ .9 The term
q 2 is instead non-vanishing. Therefore, if CVC were an exact symmetry, we
should conclude that f2 (q 2 ) = 0. In reality, mK = mπ . However, ﬂavor
SU (3) is still an approximate symmetry, which means that f2 (q 2 ) is small
with respect to f1 (q 2 ). In a ﬁrst approximation, we can then neglect it.
(iii) There is a further reason to neglect the term f2 (q 2 )q µ . The fourmomentum q = pK − pπ can be rewritten in terms of the lepton and neutrino
momenta, pl and pνl using energy–momentum conservation, as q = pl + pνl .
When we multiply it by the leptonic matrix element in eq. (8.101) we ﬁnd,
using the Dirac equation,
q µ ū(νl )γµ (1 − γ 5 )v(l) = ū(νl ) pνl (1 − γ 5 )v(l) + ū(νl )(1 + γ 5 ) pl v(l)
= −ml ū(νl )(1 + γ 5 )v(l) .

(8.112)

The lepton mass ml , especially when the lepton is the electron, is small compared with the kaon mass. Therefore the term proportional to f2 (q 2 )q µ in
the matrix element gives a small contribution both because f2 is small and
because it is suppressed by ml /mK with respect to the leading term. In the
following we will neglect it (of course, it would not take great eﬀort to carry
out the computation more generally, keeping also f2 , but it is important to
understand where the dominant contribution comes from).
(iv) Our ﬁnal approximation is to observe that, in the spirit of CVC, the
momentum transfer q 2 is small, since we consider the mass diﬀerence between
mK and mπ as small, and we therefore approximate f1 (q 2 )  f1 (0).

8.3
In principle all these approximations can be improved systematically, order
by order in the deviations from SU (3) symmetry. Furthermore, using SU (3)
symmetry, f1 (0) can be related to a similar quantity for pion decay, and it
can be shown that f1 (0) = 1 in the limit of exact symmetry. The interested
reader is referred to Okun (1982), Sections 4.3 and 6.4.
In conclusion, we write
π − |s̄γ µ (1 − γ 5 )u|K 0   pµ .

(8.113)

The rest of the computation is long but straightforward. The matrix element
is
GF sin θC µ
√
Mf i = −
p ū(νl )γµ (1 − γ 5 )v(l) .
(8.114)
2
Summing over the polarization of the ﬁnal lepton,
|Mf i |2 =

˜
G2F sin2 θC µ ν ˆ
p p Tr pνl γµ (1 − γ 5 )( pl + ml )(1 + γ 5 )γν .
2

(8.115)

The calculation of the traces and the subsequent contraction of Lorentz indices
gives
ˆ
˜
(8.116)
|Mf i |2 = 4G2F sin2 θC 2(ppνl )(ppl ) − p2 (pl pνl ) .
We compute the scalar products in the kaon rest frame, which gives
p2 = m2K + m2π + 2mK Eπ ,
1
(ppνl ) = (3m2K − m2π + m2l ) − mK (2El + Eπ ) ,
2
1
(ppl ) = − (m2K + m2π + m2l ) + mK (2El + Eπ ) ,
2
1 2
(pl pνl ) = (mK + m2π − m2l ) − mK Eπ .
2

(8.117)
(8.118)
(8.119)
(8.120)

The quickest way to obtain eq. (8.120) is to write energy–momentum conservation in the form pK − pπ = pl + pνl . Taking the squared modulus of
both sides, we get m2K + m2π − 2pK pπ = m2l + 2pl pνl . In the kaon rest frame,
pK pπ = mK Eπ , and we obtain eq. (8.120). The other relations are obtained
similarly.
Using eqs. (6.20) and (6.89) and choosing the lepton and pion energies as
independent variables, the decay width is
dΓ =

1
|Mf i |2 dΦ(3) ,
2mK

dΦ(3) =

1
dEl dEπ .
32π 3

(8.121)

Neglecting for simplicity ml , we ﬁnd after some algebra
dΓ =

˜
G2F sin2 θC mK ˆ 2
Eπ − m2π − (mK − Eπ − 2El )2 dEl dEπ .
8π 3

(8.122)

We can now integrate over the lepton energy, at ﬁxed Eπ . Using the results
of Problem 6.1, the kinematical limits, when ml = 0, are
Elmin =

mK − Eπ − |p π |
,
2

Elmax =

mK − Eπ + |p π |
.
2

(8.123)

This gives

´3/2
G2F sin2 θC mK ` 2
dEπ .
Eπ − m2π
12π 3
We ﬁnally integrate over dEπ , with the limits
dΓ =

Eπmin = mπ ,

Eπmax =

m2K + m2π
.
2mK

(8.124)

(8.125)

Solved problems: weak decays 215

216 The low-energy limit of the electroweak theory
In principle the integration can be performed exactly, but the result is slightly
complicated. If, for simplicity, we limit ourselves to the leading and next-toleading expansion in mπ /mK we can expand the integrand in eq. (8.124) in
powers of mπ and we ﬁnd
„
«
G2 sin2 θC m5K
8m2π
Γ F
1
−
.
(8.126)
768π 3
m2K

Summary of chapter
• Weak decays in which the momentum transfer is small compared to
the masses of the W ± and Z 0 boson, and scattering processes with
ECM
mW , can be computed using a low-energy approximation
to the Standard Model.
• The low-energy interaction Lagrangian is a four-fermion theory,
obtained as the product of two fermionic currents involving leptons
or quarks. There are two distinct types of processes: those involving neutral currents (which at the fundamental level correspond
to Feynman graphs involving the Z 0 boson) and those involving
charged currents (which are mediated by the W ± bosons).
• The leptonic charged current is given in eq. (8.32) and the hadronic
charged current is given in eq. (8.33). The eﬀective Lagrangian for
processes involving charged currents is given in eq. (8.31).
• The leptonic neutral current is given in eq. (8.35) and the hadronic
neutral current is given in eq. (8.36). The eﬀective Lagrangian for
processes involving neutral currents is given in eq. (8.37).
• Left-handed and right-handed ﬁelds enter the theory in a diﬀerent
way. In particular, charged currents are built only with left-handed
ﬁelds. Neutral currents contain also right-handed ﬁelds, but with
couplings that diﬀer from the left-handed ones. Therefore weak
interactions violate parity.
• While the calculation of the matrix elements of the leptonic currents is straightforward, the computation of the matrix elements
of the hadronic currents is more diﬃcult, because the current is
written in terms of quark ﬁelds while the initial and ﬁnal states
are hadrons. In general, we are not able to compute the hadronic
matrix elements explicitly, but we can parametrize them in such a
way that our ignorance of the internal hadronic structure is hidden
in a few form factors. Some detailed examples have been given in
the Solved Problem section.

Exercises 217

Further reading
• Two excellent books on the phenomenology of weak
interactions at low energies are Okun (1982), where
the reader can ﬁnd a large number of explicit calculations of weak decays, and Georgi (1984). Note
that Okun deﬁnes γ 5 = −iγ 0 γ 1 γ 2 γ 3 γ 4 while we
deﬁne γ 5 = +iγ 0 γ 1 γ 2 γ 3 γ 4 .

• Many explicit calculations of weak processes can
be found in the collection of solved problems by
Di Giacomo, Paﬀuti and Rossi (1994).
• For particle physics phenomenology, with emphasis
on the experimental aspects, an excellent book is
Perkins (2000), especially the updated 4th edition.

Exercises
(8.1) Consider the neutron β-decay, n → pe− ν̄e .
(i) Show that the matrix element of the hadronic
current between the neutron state |n and the proton states |p is p|jµh |n = p|Vµh |n − p|Ahµ |n ,
with
p|Vµh |n = f1 (q 2 )ūp γµ un + f2 (q 2 )ūp σµν q ν un
+f3 (q 2 )qµ ūp un ,

(8.127)

p|Ahµ |n = g1 (q 2 )ūp γµ γ 5 un + g2 (q 2 )ūp σµν q ν γ 5 un
+g3 (q 2 )qµ ūp γ 5 un ,
(8.128)
where un and up are the neutron and proton wave
µ
functions, respectively, and q µ = pµ
n − pp is the difference between the neutron and the proton fourmomentum.
(ii) Show that the form factors can be approximated by their values at q 2 = 0.
(iii) Using CVC and symmetry arguments, it can
be shown that the main contribution comes from
f1 (0) ≡ gV and g1 (0) ≡ gA and furthermore gV  1
(see Okun (1982), Sections 5.5 and 5.6). Therefore
p|jµh |n  ūp γµ (1 − gA γ 5 )un .

(8.129)

Using this approximation for the matrix element of
the hadronic current, compute the decay width as
a function of the electron energy Ee and ﬁnd the
Fermi spectrum of beta decay,
p
G2 cos2 θC
dΓ
2
= F 3
(1+3gA
)Ee (∆−Ee )2 Ee2 − m2e ,
dEe
2π
(8.130)

where ∆ = mn − mp . Experimentally, gA and
gV are relatively real (which follows from timereversal invariance as in Solved Problem 8.3) and
gA /gV = 1.261(4).
(iv) Plot the result, eq. (8.130), against Ee , and
investigate how the end-point of the spectrum
changes if the neutrino mass is non-zero.
(v) Compute the total decay rate and compare with
the neutron lifetime, τ = 1/Γ = 885.7 ± 0.8 s.
(8.2) Experimentally, the decay µ− → e− γ is not observed and the present limit is
Γ(µ− → e− γ)
< 1.2 × 10−11 .
Γtot

(8.131)

In the Standard Model, the decay µ− → e− γ is
indeed forbidden.
(i) Consider a hypothetical interaction term in the
Lagrangian of the form L = jµ Aµ , where jµ is a
conserved vector current with a non-vanishing matrix element between the electron and the muon.
Show that, for a process with an on-shell photon, so
that q 2 = 0, where q µ the photon four-momentum,
e− |j µ (0)|µ−  = f2 (0)ūe σ µν qν uµ + f3 (0)q µ ūe uµ ,
(8.132)
where ue , uµ are the electron and muon wave functions, and the argument of the form factors is
q 2 = 0.
(ii) Show that the corresponding matrix element
for µ− → e− γ is
Mf i = f2 (0) ∗µ qν ūe σ µν uµ .

(8.133)

218 The low-energy limit of the electroweak theory
Verify that, dimensionally, f2 (0) is the inverse of
a mass. From the discussion in Problem 7.2 it
follows that this is a magnetic dipole transition.
This motivates the deﬁnition of the quantity F2 as
f2 (0) = F2 e/(2mµ ).
(iii) Show that the decay rate is
„
«3
e2 |F2 |2
m2
Γ(µ− → e− γ) =
.
mµ 1 − 2e
32π
mµ
(8.134)
To perform the sum over the polarizations of the
photon in a covariant way make the replacement
∗
µ ν → −ηµν

(8.135)

(see Peskin and Schroeder (1995), pages 159-160
for the proof). Compute the experimental bound
on |F2 | that follows from eq. (8.131).
(8.3) (i) Estimate the cross-section for neutrino–electron
scattering at s  m2W (with s the square of the CM
energy) using only the general form of the Fermi
Lagrangian and dimensional considerations.
(ii) Using the explicit form of the currents in the
Fermi Lagrangian, write the amplitude for the process e− νe → e− νe . Realize that there is both a
contribution from neutral currents and one from
charged currents. Perform the calculation of the
cross-section.
Hint: when summing the contribution to the amplitude from neutral currents and from charged currents, use in the charged current term the Fierz
identity, valid for any four Dirac spinors wavefunctions u1 , . . . , u4
[ū1 γ µ (1 − γ 5 )u2 ] [ū3 γµ (1 − γ 5 )u4 ]

= [ū1 γ µ (1 − γ 5 )u4 ] [ū3 γµ (1 − γ 5 )u2 ] . (8.136)
This and similar identities between products of
fermion bilinears are proved, e.g. in Okun (1982),
Section 29.3.4. (Observe that, if instead of using
the wave functions u1 , . . . , u4 , we write the identity in terms of the quantized Dirac ﬁelds, there is
a further minus sign from the anticommutation of
the creation and annihilation operators.)
(8.4) (i) Show that, in a medium with target density n
(number of particles per unit volume), the interaction rate, that is, the number of scattering events
per unit time performed by a given particle, is
Γ = nσv ,

(8.137)

where σ is the cross-section and v the average relative velocity.
(ii) In the early Universe, a particle is in equilibrium with the primordial plasma as long as the
interaction rate Γ of the processes that maintains
equilibrium is larger than the expansion rate of the
Universe, which is given by the Hubble parameter H. In the radiation-dominated era, the Hubble
parameter is related to the temperature of the Universe by H ∼ T 2 /MPl , where MPl ∼ 1019 GeV is
the Planck mass.
Show that, at a temperature T , for particles with
mass m  T , n ∼ T 3 and, using the cross-section
found in Exercise 8.3, give an estimate of the temperature at which neutrinos decoupled from the
rest of the primordial plasma.

9

Path integral quantization
Until now we have used canonical quantization, that is, we have promoted the classical ﬁelds to quantum operators. In this chapter we
present an alternative formulation of quantum mechanics and of QFT,
due to Feynman (who elaborated on work of Dirac) and known as path
integral quantization, in which the coordinates in quantum mechanics
(QM), and the ﬁelds in QFT, remain ordinary functions rather than
operators.
Canonical quantization, with its creation and annihilation operators,
gives a more immediate understanding of the notion of particle in QFT
(or of excitations in condensed matter). However, the path integral
technique has a number of other advantages. Namely,
• We have seen that the basic object in the computation of amplitudes in QFT is the vacuum expectation value of the T -products
of ﬁelds. In the canonical quantization this is expressed in terms of
the exponential of the interaction Hamiltonian, see eq. (5.67), and
to compute this quantity we expand the exponential order by order
in the coupling constant. Indeed, the exponential of an operator is
deﬁned by its Taylor expansion. This deﬁnition of QFT is therefore
intrinsically perturbative. Non-perturbative terms, that is, terms
non-analytic in the coupling constant g, like exp{−O(1/g 2 )}, cannot be computed, and in fact they are not even well deﬁned, within
canonical quantization.1
The path integral formulation provides instead a deﬁnition of the
theory which is in principle non-perturbative, and to which it is
possible to apply a number of methods, from numerical simulations
to semiclassical approximations, that allow us to compute nonperturbative eﬀects. This is especially important in theories, like
QCD, where non-perturbative eﬀects can be crucial.
• The path integral formulation shows the existence of deep relations
between quantum ﬁeld theory, statistical mechanics and critical
phenomena. This has produced, especially in the 1970s–1980s, a
ﬂow of ideas in both directions.
• Even from a computational point of view, there are situations (e.g.
in string theory) where the actual computations based on the path
integral can be simpler than in the operator formalism.
Therefore, canonical and path integral quantization complement each
other, and are both basic tools of QFT. In this chapter we will illustrate
this technique and some of its applications even if, within the scope of
this course, we will only be able to describe the most elementary aspects.

9.1 Path integral formulation
of quantum mechanics
220
9.2 Path integral quantization
of scalar ﬁelds
224
9.3 Perturbative evaluation of
the path integral
225
9.4 Euclidean formulation

228

9.5 Critical phenomena

231

9.6 Finite temperature

238

9.7 Solved Problems

239

1

In particular cases, typically in some
models living in 1+1 space-time dimensions, one can obtain non-perturbative
results with the operator formalism, using special techniques beyond the scope
of this book, but these models are exceptions rather than the rule.

220 Path integral quantization

9.1

Path integral formulation of quantum
mechanics

The basic idea can be understood directly in non-relativistic quantum
mechanics. In this section we denote the operators by a hat, so the
position and momentum operators are q̂ and p̂, respectively, and the
Hamiltonian is Ĥ(q̂, p̂). For simplicity, we consider a one-dimensional
system. As we already recalled in Chapter 5, in the Schrödinger representation the states evolve with time,
|ψS (t) = e−iĤt |ψS (0) ,

(9.1)

while the operators are time independent. In the Heisenberg representation the states
(9.2)
|ψH ≡ eiĤt |ψS (t)
are by construction time independent, and the operators evolve as
ÂH (t) = eiĤt ÂS e−iĤt .

(9.3)

In the Heisenberg representation we denote by |q, ti the vector which is
an eigenstate of the operator q̂(ti ), with eigenvalue q,
q̂(ti )|q, ti = q|q, ti .

(9.4)

In the Schrödinger representation, the amplitude for evolving between
the state |qi at time Ti and the state |qf at time Tf is
A = qf |e−iĤ(Tf −Ti ) |qi .

(9.5)

In the Heisenberg representation we have
eiĤTi |qi ≡ |qi , Ti ,

eiĤTf |qf ≡ |qf , Tf ,

(9.6)

and therefore
A = qf , Tf |qi , Ti .
At any ﬁxed t, the states |q, t form a complete set,

1 = dq |q, t q, t| ,

(9.7)

(9.8)

where here and in the following it is understood that the integral runs
between −∞ and ∞. We choose a set of intermediate values of time
t0 , t1 , . . . tN with Ti = t0 < t1 < t2 < . . . < tN = Tf ; we take for
simplicity the tm equally spaced, tm = t0 + m, with N  = Tf − Ti .
Then we can write
A = qf , Tf |qi , Ti

= dq1 qf , Tf |q1 , t1 q1 , t1 |qi , Ti

= dq1 dq2 qf , Tf |q2 , t2 q2 , t2 |q1 , t1 q1 , t1 |qi , Ti

=

dq1 dq2 . . . dqN −1

N
−1

m=0

qm+1 , tm+1 |qm , tm ,

(9.9)

9.1

Path integral formulation of quantum mechanics 221

where in the last line we used the notation qi = q0 , qf = qN . Now we
evaluate qm+1 , tm+1 |qm , tm going to the Schrödinger representation,
qm+1 , tm+1 |qm , tm = qm+1 |e−iĤtm+1 eiĤtm |qm
= qm+1 |e−iĤ |qm

= dpm qm+1 |pm pm |e−iĤ |qm . (9.10)
We deﬁne Ĥ(p̂, q̂) so that, if in the classical Hamiltonian there are terms
with products of p and q, in Ĥ we order p̂ on the left of q̂. We also
normalize the plane wave as q|p = eiqp , which corresponds to the
normalization (6.1) in a unit volume. Then
qm+1 , tm+1 |qm , tm
(9.11)

iqm+1 pm
2
pm |1 − iĤ(p̂, q̂) + O( )|qm
= dpm e


= dpm eiqm+1 pm 1 − iH(pm , qm ) + O(2 ) pm |qm



= dpm ei(qm+1 −qm )pm e−iH(pm ,qm ) + O(2 )


qm+1 − qm
= dpm exp −i H(pm , qm ) − pm
+ O(2 ) .

Inserting this result into eq. (9.9) we ﬁnd

(9.12)
qf , Tf |qi , Ti = dp0 (dq1 dp1 ) . . . (dqN −1 dpN −1 )
&
'
N
−1 

qm+1 − qm
× exp −i
H(pm , qm ) − pm
+ O(2 ) .

m=0
Consider the function q(t) such that q(t0 ) = q0 , q(t1 ) = q1 , . . . , q(tN ) =
qN , and deﬁned for instance by a linear interpolation for intermediate
values of t, as in Fig. 9.1. Since in eq. (9.12) we integrate over all possible
values of q1 , . . . , qN −1 , we are actually integrating over a very large class
of functions with ﬁxed boundary values.
Now we want to take the limit  → 0. In this limit the integral in
eq. (9.12) runs over an inﬁnite number of integration variables, and deﬁnes a functional integral, i.e. an integral over all possible functions
q(t), p(t), with the boundary conditions q(Ti ) = qi , q(Tf ) = qf . Considering for instance the free-particle case H = p2 /(2m), we see that, after
performing the integral over the momenta, we remain with an integral
over the dqm of exp{i(m/2)(qm+1 − qm )2 }. Therefore the integral over
each slice dqm produces a factor ∼ 1/2 and, to obtain a ﬁnite limit as
 → 0, in the correct discretization we must associate to each dqi a factor
∼ 1/1/2 that compensate for this, and also a numerical coeﬃcient that
reproduces the normalization factor for the amplitude which is obtained
in the operator formalism. Actually, even if it is possible to track in
detail the normalization factors (and in non-relativistic quantum mechanics they are important for reproducing the correct amplitudes), we

qN
q

1

q2
q0
t0 t1 t2

tN

Fig. 9.1 The function q(t) deﬁned
by an interpolation of the values
q(t0 ) = q0 , q(t1 ) = q1 , . . . , q(tN ) =
qN .

222 Path integral quantization

are not be interested in them, since, as we will see below, in QFT they
cancel anyhow between numerator and denominator in expressions such
as eq. (5.67). We then indicate with [dpdq] the formal limit of the integration measure, including some appropriate normalization factor N ()
that we will not need explicitly,
[dpdq] = lim N () dp0 (dq1 dp1 ) . . . (dqN −1 dpN −1 ) .
→0

(9.13)

To discuss the non-relativistic limit, it is convenient to reinstate explicitly . Then, letting  → 0 in eq. (9.12), we get
& 
'
 q(Tf )=qf
i Tf
[dpdq] exp
dt [pq̇ − H(p, q)] .
qf , Tf |qi , Ti =
 Ti
q(Ti )=qi
(9.14)
If the Hamiltonian has the simple form H(p, q) = p2 /2+V (q) the integral
over p is Gaussian and can be performed explicitly. The result (again
reabsorbing into the measure [dq] some overall factor) is
qf , Tf |qi , Ti =

 q(Tf )=qf
[dq] exp
q(Ti )=qi

where S is the classical action,
 Tf
S=
dt L(q, q̇) ,
Ti

L=

i
S


,

(9.15)

1 2
q̇ − V (q) .
2

(9.16)

The transition amplitude is therefore written as a sum over all possible
paths q(t) which satisfy the boundary conditions q(Ti ) = qi and q(Tf ) =
qf , and each path is weighted by the exponential of i times its action,
in units of . A ﬁrst interesting consequence of this expression is a
novel understanding of the classical limit. The classical limit corresponds
formally to  → 0, and in this limit the integral can be computed in
the stationary phase approximation: the conﬁgurations which are far
from the extrema of S give contributions which oscillate wildly under
small deformations of the path, q(t) → q(t) + δq(t) and therefore these
contributions integrate to zero. Then, in the limit  → 0, the only nonvanishing contributions to the integral come from the extrema of the
action,
δ
S = 0.
(9.17)
δq
This is the equation that deﬁnes the classical trajectory in classical mechanics. We have therefore recovered the classical limit: as  → 0, only
the trajectories that satisfy the classical equations of motion contribute.
We then ﬁnd a beautiful physical picture, due to Feynman, of quantum
mechanics: a particle “explores” all possible paths simultaneously, and
the quantum amplitude is obtained by summing over all trajectories
which interpolate between the initial and the ﬁnal point. In the classical
limit this sum is dominated by the conﬁgurations which are solutions of

9.1

Path integral formulation of quantum mechanics 223

the equations of motion, but when  is not small compared to the scales
in question, many other trajectories contribute.
Having understood how to recover the classical limit, we now set again
 = 1. Consider the insertion into the path integral of a factor q(t), with
t given and such that Ti < t < Tf ,
 q(Tf )=qf

[dq] q(t)eiS .

(9.18)

q(Ti )=qi

Consider a generic path which satisﬁes the boundary conditions q(T i ) =
qi , q(Tf ) = qf . At the intermediate value t it will have a generic value
q̄. We can write
 ∞
 q(t)=q̄
 q(Tf )=qf
 q(Tf )=qf
[dq] =
dq̄
[dq]
[dq] ,
(9.19)
−∞

q(Ti )=qi

q(Ti )=qi

q(t)=q̄

 Tf

while at the same time the action Ti dt L can be split as
 Tf
t dt L. Therefore the expression in eq. (9.18) becomes



∞

q(t)=q̄

×

Ti dt L +

t

dq̄
−∞

t

[dq] exp i
q(Ti )=qi


q(Tf )=qf

dt L

& 

Ti

'

Tf

dt L

[dq] exp i

q̄
.

(9.20)

t

q(t)=q̄

However, the ﬁrst term in parentheses is just q̄, t|qi , Ti and the second
is qf , Tf |q̄, t . Therefore
 q(Tf )=qf
[dq] q(t) e

iS

 ∞
=
−∞

q(Ti )=qi

 ∞
=

−∞

Using the completeness relation
 q(Tf )=qf

dq̄ qf , Tf |q̄, t q̄ q̄, t|qi , Ti
dq̄ qf , Tf |q̂(t)|q̄, t q̄, t|qi , Ti . (9.21)

∞
−∞

dq̄|q̄, t q̄, t| = 1 we ﬁnally obtain

[dq] q(t) eiS = qf , Tf |q̂(t)|qi , Ti .

(9.22)

q(Ti )=qi

Therefore the matrix element of the Heisenberg operator q̂(t) is obtained
computing the path integral of the function q(t), with the weight eiS .
Consider now
 q(Tf )=qf
[dq] q(t1 )q(t2 ) . . . q(tn ) eiS .
(9.23)
q(Ti )=qi

In the path integral the factors q(ti ) are just functions, i.e. c-numbers,
and therefore they commute, so we can order them as we prefer. In
particular, we can decide to write them as q(t̄1 )q(t̄2 ) . . . q(t̄n ), where t̄i
is the permutation of the ti such that t̄1 > t̄2 > . . . > t̄n . At this point

224 Path integral quantization

we can repeat the above argument, splitting the integration over paths
from t = Ti to t = Tf into an integration over paths from Ti to t̄n , from
t̄n to t̄n−1 , etc. and, repeating the same steps as above, we ﬁnd
 q(Tf )=qf

[dq] q(t1 )q(t2 ) . . . q(tn )eiS = qf , Tf |q̂(t̄1 ) . . . q̂(t̄n )|qi , Ti .

q(Ti )=qi

(9.24)

However, q̂(t̄1 ) . . . q̂(t̄n ) = T {q̂(t1 ) . . . q̂(tn )} so, ﬁnally,
 q(Tf )=qf

[dq] q(t1 ) . . . q(tn ) eiS = qf , Tf |T {q̂(t1 ) . . . q̂(tn )}|qi , Ti .

q(Ti )=qi

(9.25)
Therefore the integration of a product of functions in the path integral
gives automatically the expectation value of the time-ordered product
of the corresponding operators.

9.2

Path integral quantization of scalar
ﬁelds

The extension from quantum mechanics to scalar ﬁeld theory, at least
at a formal level, is rather straightforward. One simply observes that, if
we have a multi-dimensional

 ( space with coordinates qj , in eq. (9.15) we
must replace [dq] with
j [dqj ]. For a scalar ﬁeld theory the discrete
label j is replaced by the continuous spatial coordinate x, and the role
of the qj (t) is taken by φ(x, t). Furthermore the Lagrangian L can be
written as d3 x L. Therefore the amplitude for a transition between a
ﬁeld conﬁguration φi (x) at time Ti and a ﬁeld conﬁguration φf (x) at
time Tf is
φf (x), Tf |φi (x), Ti =

 φ(x,Tf )=φf (x)
φ(x,Ti )=φi (x)

& 
Dφ exp i

Tf

'
d4 x L

,

Ti

(9.26)
where Dφ is the integration over all ﬁeld conﬁgurations
φ(x,
t)
with
the
T

T
given boundary conditions, and Tif d4 x = Tif dt d3 x. Observe that
φi,f (x) are the initial and ﬁnal values of a ﬁeld φ which evolves with the
full equations of motion, rather than with the free KG equations (as the
coordinate q(t) of the previous section was a solution of the equations of
motion of the complete Hamiltonian). The corresponding Heisenberg operator φ̂(x) is therefore the full quantum ﬁeld that appears, for instance,
on the left-hand side of eq. (5.67), rather than the interaction-picture
ﬁeld, which instead evolves with the free KG equation.
We now choose as initial and ﬁnal ﬁeld conﬁgurations the vacuum,
φi (x) = φf (x) = 0 and we send Ti → −∞, Tf → +∞. Therefore we

9.3

ﬁnd the vacuum-to-vacuum transition amplitude

0, t = +∞|0, t = −∞ = Dφ eiS ,

Perturbative evaluation of the path integral 225

(9.27)

where the integral is performed over all ﬁeld conﬁgurations that vanish
at t → ±∞. Similarly eq. (9.25) gives

0, t = +∞|T {φ̂(x1 ) . . . φ̂(xn )}|0, t = −∞ = Dφ φ(x1 ) . . . φ(xn ) eiS ,
(9.28)
with φ̂ the full quantum ﬁeld in the Heisenberg representation. As in
Chapter 5, we denote |0, t = −∞ simply by |0 . Then eq. (5.67) becomes

0|T {φ̂(x1 ) . . . φ̂(xn )}|0 =

Dφ φ(x1 ) . . . φ(xn ) eiS

.
Dφ eiS

(9.29)

This is the basic formula which connects the operator formalism to the
path integral formalism. The left-hand side of eq. (9.29) is the quantity
that appears in the LSZ formula (5.46), and in Chapter 5 we understood how to evaluate it in terms of ﬁelds in the interaction picture, see
eq. (5.67). Now we see that it can also be evaluated computing the functional integral on the right-hand side of eq. (9.29). This means ﬁrst of
all that it should be possible to rederive from the path integral representation the Feynman rules that we obtained using the operator language.
We will see in the next section how this can be done. However, the
right-hand side of eq. (9.29) in principle is deﬁned also beyond perturbation theory, and in Section 9.4 we will discuss some non-perturbative
techniques.
Observe also that until now we have not been careful in collecting
the overall numerical factors that deﬁne the measure Dφ. However,
as we anticipated, these factors cancel between the numerator and the
denominator in the right-hand side of eq. (9.29).

9.3

Perturbative evaluation of the path
integral

We now want to evaluate perturbatively the right-hand side of eq. (9.29),
and verify that we reproduce the same results obtained in the operator
formalism. To begin, we consider the numerator in eq. (9.29) for an
n-point function in a free scalar theory,

(9.30)
G(x1 , . . . , xn ) ≡ Dφ φ(x1 ) . . . φ(xn ) eiS ,
with

1
S=
2





d4 x ∂ µ φ∂µ φ − m2 φ2 .

(9.31)

226 Path integral quantization

We ﬁrst observe that it is not at all evident that the integral so deﬁned makes sense, because the oscillating factor eiS is not necessarily
suﬃcient to provide the convergence of the integration over large ﬂuctuations, i.e. over the ﬁeld conﬁgurations with a large value of the action.
One way
 to solve this problem is to add a small convergence factor
exp{− d4 x φ2 /2} and to take the limit  → 0+ later. We therefore
consider



i
d4 x ∂ µ φ∂µ φ − (m2 − i)φ2
Dφ φ(x1 ) . . . φ(xn ) exp
(9.32)
2
and the convergence factor just amounts to the replacement m2 → m2 −
i, exactly as in the Feynman prescription for the propagator; compare
with eq. (5.78). We next introduce



i
W [J] ≡ Dφ exp
d4 x ∂ µ φ∂µ φ − (m2 − i)φ2
2

+ d4 x φ(x)J(x) .
(9.33)
W [J] is a functional of the ﬁeld J(x), and its usefulness comes from the
fact that, performing functional diﬀerentiations with respect to J, we
obtain the Green’s functions G(x1 , . . . , xn ). The functional derivative is
a formal manipulation deﬁned by the rule
δ
J(x) = δ (4) (x − y) ,
δJ(y)

(9.34)

plus the standard rules for the derivative of composite functions, and by
the rule that we can carry it inside the integral sign; this means that

δ
(9.35)
d4 x J(x)φ(x) = φ(y) ,
δJ(y)
and therefore
G(x1 , . . . , xn ) =




δ
δ
...
W [J]
.
δJ(x1 )
δJ(xn )
|J=0

(9.36)

For this reason, W [J] is called the generating functional of the Green’s
functions. To compute W [J] explicitly we proceed as follows. First of
all, we write it in momentum space, using



i
4
µ
2
2
d x ∂ φ∂µ φ − (m − i)φ + d4 x φ(x)J(x)
2


1
d4 p 
˜
=
φ̃(p) . (9.37)
φ̃(−p)i(p2 − m2 + i)φ̃(p) + J(−p)
4
2
(2π)
It can be convenient to work with a ﬁnite space-time volume, so the
four-momenta are discrete and the integrals are replaced by sums. The
integration over all possible functions φ(x) can be written as an integration over all possible Fourier modes φ̃(p),

dφ̃(p) .
(9.38)
Dφ =
p

9.3

Perturbative evaluation of the path integral 227

Proportionality factors in this equation are irrelevant because they cancel in ratios like eq. (9.29), and we can take eq. (9.38) as a deﬁnition of
the integration measure. The integral can now be performed with the
help of a very useful identity valid for Gaussian integrals,
⎤
⎡
 +∞ 
N
N
N


1
yi Aij yj +
yi zi ⎦
dyi exp ⎣−
2 i,j=1
−∞ i=1
i=1
⎤
⎡
N

1
= (2π)N/2 (det A)−1/2 exp ⎣+
(9.39)
zi (A−1 )ij zj ⎦ ,
2 i,j=1
where Aij is an invertible matrix. Coming back to a continuum notation,
we ﬁnd

1
d4 p ˜
˜
W [J] = W [0] exp
J(−p)D̃(p)J(p)
,
(9.40)
2
(2π)4


where

Dφ eiS ,

(9.41)

i
.
p2 − m2 + i

(9.42)

W [0] =
D̃(p) =

We recognize that D̃(p) is the Feynman propagator in momentum space.
From the path integral formulation it becomes clear that the propagator
is simply the inverse of the operator which appears in the kinetic term.
Going back into coordinate space, eq. (9.40) becomes

1
W [J] = W [0] exp
d4 xd4 y J(x)D(x − y)J(y) .
(9.43)
2
Taking the functional derivatives we therefore ﬁnd all the Green’s functions of the free theory. For the two-point function we see that



δ
δ
iS
Dφ φ(x1 )φ(x2 )e =
W [J]
= W [0] D(x1 − x2 )
δJ(x1 ) δJ(x2 )
|J=0
(9.44)
and therefore

Dφ φ(x1 )φ(x2 )eiS

= D(x1 − x2 ) ,
(9.45)
Dφ eiS
as we expected from eq. (9.29). Taking multiple derivatives we obtain
all higher-point Green’s functions; for instance,
 -


iS
iS
Dφ e
Dφ φ(x1 ) . . . φ(x4 )e


1
δ4
exp
=
d4 xd4 y J(x)D(x − y)J(y)
δJ(x1 ) . . . δJ(x4 )
2
J=0
= D12 D34 + D13 D24 + D14 D23 ,

(9.46)

228 Path integral quantization

with the usual notation Dij = D(xi − xj ). We see that we generate all
possible connected and disconnected Green’s functions, with the same
combinatorics of the Wick theorem. Observe also that if we introduce
Z[J] ≡ log W [J]

(9.47)

in the free theory we have
Z[J] = Z[0] +

1
2


d4 xd4 y J(x)D(x − y)J(y)

(9.48)

and therefore Z[J] is the generating functional of the connected Green’s
functions, which in the free case is of course only the two-point function.
Having understood how to compute the path integral in the free theory, it is not diﬃcult to introduce perturbatively the interaction, for
instance in the form of a term V (φ) = λφ4 /4!. The path integral becomes

Dφ φ(x1 ) . . . φ(xn )


 λ
1 µ
× exp i d4 x
∂ φ∂µ φ − (m2 − i)φ2 − φ4
(9.49)
2
4!
and is now non-Gaussian, and cannot be performed exactly. However,
we can expand the exponential perturbatively in λ. For example, the
contribution to the two-point function to order λ is


R 4
µ
2
2
i
λ
d4 x Dφ φ(x1 )φ(x2 )φ4 (x) e 2 d x [∂ φ∂µ φ−(m −i )φ ]
−i
4!



δ6
λ
= −i
d4 x
W
[J]
,
(9.50)
4!
δ 4 J(x)δJ(x1 )δJ(x2 )
|J=0
where W [J] is the generating functional of the free theory computed
above. One can then check that we recover the Wick theorem and the
same results that we obtained from the operator formalism. For a detailed discussion, see Ramond (1990), Chapter 4. As in the free theory,
using Z[J] instead of W [J] we generate directly the connected Green’s
function.

9.4

Euclidean formulation

We have seen that the perturbative expansion of the path integral reproduces the expansion in terms of Feynman graphs. The greatest virtue of
the path integral approach, however, is that it allows us to give a nonperturbative deﬁnition of a ﬁeld theory, and it actually makes possible
the computation of non-perturbative eﬀects.
To this end, it is convenient to ensure the convergence of the path
integral in a diﬀerent way. Rather than adding a convergence factor
exp{− d4 x φ2 /2}, which, as we have seen, corresponds to the Feynman

9.4

Euclidean formulation 229

prescription for the propagator, we rotate the theory in Euclidean space.
That is, we deﬁne the Euclidean time tE as
tE = it .

(9.51)

Therefore d4 x = dtd3 x = −idtE d3 x ≡ −i(d4 x)E and
∂
∂
=i
.
∂t
∂tE

(9.52)

The action of a scalar ﬁeld, with a generic potential V (φ), becomes



1 µ
S = d4 x
∂ φ∂µ φ − m2 φ2 − V (φ)
2


1
1
1
= d4 x
(∂t φ)2 − (∂i φ)2 − m2 φ2 − V (φ)
2
2
2


1
1
1
= −i (d4 x)E − (∂tE φ)2 − (∂i φ)2 − m2 φ2 − V (φ)
2
2
2
≡ iSE ,
(9.53)
where we have deﬁned the Euclidean action SE ,


1
1
1
4
(∂t φ)2 + (∂i φ)2 + m2 φ2 + V (φ)
SE = (d x)E
2 E
2
2


1
1
= d4 x
∂µ φ∂µ φ + m2 φ2 + V (φ) .
2
2

(9.54)

In the last line we suppressed the subscript E from Euclidean quantities
since in this section, from now on, only Euclidean quantities will appear,
and we have used the convention that repeated Lorentz indices, both
E
=
lower or both upper, are summed with the Euclidean metric ηµν
(+, +, +, +), e.g.
∂µ φ∂µ φ ≡ (∂tE φ)2 + (∂i φ)2 .
(9.55)
The potential V (φ) must be bounded from below, otherwise the theory
does not have a stable ground state. Without loss of generality, we can
shift the potential by an arbitrary constant so that V (φ)  0. Then we
see that the Euclidean action is positive deﬁnite and the factor
eiS = e−SE

(9.56)

ensures the convergence of the integration over large ﬂuctuations, since
paths which have a very large action are exponentially suppressed. Therefore the path integral over Euclidean ﬁeld conﬁgurations φ(tE , x) is well
deﬁned, and we can compute the Green’s function in Euclidean space.
The Green’s functions in Minkowski space can then be reconstructed by
analytic continuation.2 So the basic quantity that we want to compute 2 It can be shown that analytic continuation is possible to all orders in peris

Dφ φ(x1 ) . . . φ(xn ) e−S ,

turbation theory.

(9.57)

230 Path integral quantization

where x1 , . . . xn are points in four-dimensional Euclidean space. Of
course, this path integral can be computed ﬁrst of all perturbatively,
expanding in powers of the coupling constants. This gives a set of Feynman rules in Euclidean space. For instance, repeating the derivation of
the previous section, we ﬁnd that the Euclidean propagator in momentum space is
1
D̃E (p) = 2
,
(9.58)
p + m2
where p2 = p20 + p2 . Similarly, a vertex in λφ4 theory carries a factor −λ instead of −iλ. These Feynman rules allow us to compute
perturbatively the Euclidean Green’s functions which then, upon analytic continuation, reproduce the Green’s functions obtained with the
Minkowski-space Feynman rules.
The perturbative expansion corresponds to studying the contributions
coming from the “small” ﬁeld conﬁgurations, i.e. from the ﬁelds which
do not diﬀer much from the perturbative vacuum φ(x) = 0. However,
the Euclidean path integral formulation allows us to go further, and to
study the contribution of ﬁeld conﬁgurations far from the perturbative
vacuum.
One possible approach is to discretize space-time and study the Euclidean path integral on a space-time lattice, using furthermore a ﬁnite
volume. Then we have a ﬁnite number of lattice sites labeled by x, and
a ﬁeld conﬁguration is speciﬁed by a ﬁnite collection of variables, i.e. by
the value φi that the ﬁeld takes at the point xi , where the index i labels
the lattice sites. The integration measure can be taken to be
Dφ =



dφi .

(9.59)

i

3
The path integral over fermionic ﬁelds
is deﬁned using anticommuting variables, rather than ordinary c-numbers.
We do not expand on this, but the interested reader can see e.g. Ramond
(1990), Chapter 5.

The functional integral is then reduced to an ordinary multiple integral,
which in principle can be studied numerically. Actually, a direct numerical evaluation of an integral over a very large number of integration
variables is out of the question, but there is a technique, known as Monte
Carlo simulation, which consists in generating a set of ﬁeld conﬁgurations with a probability distribution e−S , and the functional integral is
replaced by the sum over this set of conﬁgurations. This approach is
extremely useful for gauge theories, since the theory on the lattice can
be deﬁned so that it preserves gauge invariance.
There is then the problem of extrapolating the results to the continuum limit (and to take the inﬁnite-volume limit). This is done using
the renormalization group techniques discussed in Section 5.9 and in the
next section. This approach has the advantage of providing a method
for computing the exact, non-perturbative, Green’s functions in a way
that in principle is not subject to any perturbative approximation. The
actual limit, however, comes from computer capabilities, especially in
the presence of fermions.3
Another possible approach is based on a semiclassical expansion, and
we discuss it in the Solved Problems section.

9.5

9.5

QFT and critical phenomena 231

QFT and critical phenomena

Another virtue of the path integral formulation is to show the existence
of deep connections between QFT and critical phenomena, as was understood in particular by K. Wilson. This connection emerges from the
Euclidean formulation of the path integral. Performing the rotation to
Euclidean space, we have seen that the right-hand side of eq. (9.29)
becomes

Dφ φ(x1 ) . . . φ(xn ) e−S

,
(9.60)
Dφ e−S
where S is the Euclidean action and the integral runs over all conﬁgurations that go to zero as the Euclidean time tE → ±∞.4 Formally,
eq. (9.60) is identical to a statistical average of a classical system living
in four spatial dimensions, in which each conﬁguration is weighted with
e−S . In the language of statistical mechanics, this is called a correlation
function. Therefore the (Minkowskian) Green’s function of quantum
ﬁeld theory in three spatial and one time dimensions (or more generally in d spatial dimensions plus time), 0|T {φ̂(x1 ) . . . φ̂(xn )}|0 , can be
obtained by computing the correlation functions of a classical statistical system living in four spatial dimensions (or more generally in d + 1
spatial dimensions), and performing the analytic continuation back to
Minkowski space.
We want to investigate what kind of statistical system can reproduce
the properties of a QFT. As discussed in the previous section, to compute
the path integral in eq. (9.60) it is convenient to put the system in a
ﬁnite volume and to discretize the four-dimensional Euclidean space,
using for instance a four-dimensional lattice with lattice spacing a. Then
the system has a ﬁnite number of variables φi = φ(xi ), corresponding
to the lattice sites, and the integration measure in the path integral is
given by eq. (9.59). When the number of lattice sites is ﬁnite, the path
integral is a well-deﬁned statistical sum. The question is how to take
the continuum limit so that a non-trivial QFT emerges.
To answer this question consider the two-point function in the massive
theory. The Euclidean propagator, in momentum space, is 1/(p2 + m2 ),
and therefore the correlation function of the corresponding statistical
system is

eipx
d4 p
,
(9.61)
φ(x)φ(0) =
(2π)4 p2 + m2
where |p|2 = pµ pµ and px = pµ xµ , with all contractions performed
with the Euclidean metric δµν . The exact computation of the integral is
involved, but for m|x|
1 the result is proportional to (1/|x|2 )e−m|x| .
Consider a point x separated from the origin by n lattice sites, say along
the ﬁrst axis. Then |x| = na and for n
1, neglecting prefactors,
φn φ0 ∼ e−amn .

(9.62)

In statistical mechanics, the behavior φn φ0 ∼ e−n/ξ deﬁnes the (di-

4

Observe that, if the vacuum is nondegenerate, i.e. if in the action there
is a potential V (φ) with just one minimum (that we can always set to be at
φ = 0 with a shift of φ, and to have the
value V (0) = 0 with a shift in V ) then
only the ﬁelds that satisfy φ(t, x ) → 0
as |xR| → ∞ have a ﬁnite action, otherwise d3 xV diverges at large |x |. Then
the only non-vanishing contribution to
the functional integral comes from ﬁeld
conﬁgurations that vanish at inﬁnity in
all four Euclidean directions.

232 Path integral quantization

mensionless) correlation length ξ, so in our case
ξ=

1
.
am

(9.63)

We see that, if we want to take the continuum limit a → 0 while keeping
the physical mass m ﬁxed, the correlation length ξ must go to inﬁnity.
The correlation length is a function of the couplings of the statistical
system. This means that, in order to obtain a continuum QFT in which
the physical masses, such as m in eq. (9.63) (and similarly the physical
couplings) are ﬁnite, we must tune the parameters of the corresponding
statistical system so that the correlation length diverges. Here we are
rephrasing, in the language of statistical mechanics, the renormalization
procedure introduced in Chapter 5: the dependence of the bare couplings
on the cutoﬀ (here the lattice spacing a) is tuned so to obtain ﬁnite values
for the renormalized masses and couplings.
A divergent correlation length is characteristic of critical systems, and
therefore removing the cutoﬀ in a QFT is analogous to tuning a statistical system toward a critical point. Considering quantum ﬁeld theories
as critical statistical systems allows us to use a whole body of physical
intuition stemming from statistical mechanics. In particular, we will
discuss in this section how to obtain a very physical understanding of
the renormalization group (RG) equations, like the Callan–Symanzik
equation, that we derived with rather formal arguments in Section 5.9.
To make the connection, we ﬁrst brieﬂy recall some basic facts about
critical phenomena.
A classic example is the two-dimensional Ising model, deﬁned placing
a “spin” variable si = ±1 on each site i of a two-dimensional lattice,
and taking as Hamiltonian

si sj ,
(9.64)
H = −J
i,j

where the sum runs only over nearest-neighbor pairs (i, j). We take
J > 0, so the interaction tends to align the spins, i.e. it is a ferromagnetic
coupling. The statistical mechanics of the Ising model is obtained from
the partition function Z = e−βF = tr e−βH , with β = 1/kB T , and
therefore is governed by the dimensionless parameter
K≡

J
.
kB T

(9.65)

As with any statistical system, at ﬁxed temperature T and ﬁxed number
of particles the equilibrium state is given by the minimum of the free
energy F = E − T S, and will be the result of the competition between
the tendency to minimize the energy E, so in our case to align the spins,
and the tendency to maximize the entropy S, so to disorder the system.
At small T the tendency to minimize energy is more important while
increasing T the tendency toward maximization of the entropy becomes
progressively more relevant. In the Ising model this competition leads to

9.5

a phase transition: below a critical temperature Tc (or, more precisely
below a critical value of kB T /J) the system develops a spontaneous
magnetization, that is M ≡ si = 0, while above Tc the magnetization
M vanishes (see Fig. 9.2). As T → Tc from below, the magnetization
goes to zero as
(9.66)
M ∼ (Tc − T )β ,
and β is known as a critical index. In the two-dimensional Ising model
β = 1/8 but this kind of behavior is quite general for critical phenomena.
In the magnetized phase there is long-range order. Since the spins tend
to be aligned, if the spin s0 at the site 0 has the value s0 = +1 then,
even if the site n is very far from the site 0, the probability of ﬁnding
sn = +1 is higher than the probability of having sn = −1. Therefore
there is no exponential decay of the correlation function (there will be,
rather, a power-law fall oﬀ) or, in other words, the correlation length is
inﬁnite. In the disordered phase T > Tc , instead, ξ is ﬁnite. As T → Tc
from above, ξ diverges as
ξ∼

1
,
(T − Tc )ν

QFT and critical phenomena 233

M

Tc

T

Fig. 9.2 The magnetization as a

function of temperature in the Ising
model.

ξ

(9.67)

with ν another critical index (ν = 1 in the two-dimensional Ising model).
This behavior is illustrated in Fig. 9.3.
We are now ready to discuss the renormalization group (RG) equations in the language of critical phenomena. First of all, observe that in
QFT the lattice spacing (as any other UV cutoﬀ) is not a physical quantity, and we are only interested in the limit a → 0. For this reason, it is
diﬃcult to have an intuitive picture of how the bare theory should depend on the cutoﬀ. In statistical mechanics, instead, the lattice spacing
is a physical quantity, for instance of order 10−8 cm in a typical condensed matter system. The correspondence between QFT and statistical
mechanics provided by the path integral is, more precisely, a correspondence between the bare Green’s functions of QFT (which are objects
about which it is diﬃcult to form an intuitive physical picture) and the
physical correlation functions of the statistical system. It is therefore
not surprising that in statistical systems the RG equations have a more
intuitive interpretation.
Consider for example the Ising model; the Hamiltonian (9.64) gives a
microscopic description of the system in terms of interactions between
nearest-neighbor spins separated by a distance a. However, we are usually not interested in the details of the interaction on a microscopic scale.
We are more interested in understanding what happens at the macroscopic scale. To go from a microscopic to a macroscopic description is
a non-trivial problem, since cooperative eﬀects between the spins can
take place. This is especially important when the correlation length ξ is
large because, even if the fundamental interaction involves only nearestneighbor pairs, the inﬂuence of each spin on the others is propagated,
via this nearest-neighbor interaction, across a distance of order ξ.

Tc

T

Fig. 9.3 The correlation length as a
function of temperature in the Ising
model.

234 Path integral quantization
a

2a

To construct an eﬀective Hamiltonian which describes the physics at
the macroscopic scale we can proceed in steps, “integrating out” the
details of the model at short scales. A possible way to do it, in the
Ising model, is via a “block spin” transformation, ﬁrst introduced by
Kadanoﬀ. Regroup the lattice sites into squares made of four adjacent
spins, as in the upper part of Fig. 9.4. If ξ
1, nearest-neighbor
spins must be very strongly
correlated.
This
means
that, deﬁning the

variables Sn = (1/4) i∈n si , where the sum is over the four adjacent
spins in the n-th square, each Sn will most of the time take the values ±1,
as the original spin variables si , and therefore we can consider them as
eﬀective spin variables, living on the centers of their respective squares,
indicated by a cross in the lower part of Fig. 9.4.5 Since the original
spins si had only nearest-neighbor interaction, in a ﬁrst approximation
also these “block spin” variables will interact among themselves only
with a nearest-neighbor interaction, but their eﬀective coupling constant
in general will not be the same as the coupling K which appears in
eqs. (9.64) and (9.65). Rather, the coupling will have a value K 2 ≡ f (K),
for some function f (K), determined by the condition that the partition
function is preserved,


Tr{Sn } e−βH [Sn ] = Tr{si } e−βH[si ] ,

Fig. 9.4 The block spin transforma-

tion.
5
Actually, there are better formulations
of the RG transformation where the calculations can be done more explicitly
and systematically. For instance, for
a scalar ﬁeld φi = φ(xi ) one can integrate over the original variables in the
path integral,Pwith a Dirac delta of the
form δ(Φn − i∈n φi ), which forces the
four variables φi in the n-th square to
have a given value Φn , so we obtain an
eﬀective theory in terms of the “block
ﬁelds” Φn . Alternatively, we can work
in momentum space, using the momentum modes φk , regularizing the theory
with a cutoﬀ Λ which restricts the Euclidean momenta to |k| < Λ. Then, in
the partition function Z, we integrate
explicitly over the modes φk in a shell
Λ − δΛ < |k| < Λ, remaining with an
eﬀective action for the low-momentum
modes. We do not enter into these
technical aspects, and we limit ourselves to illustrate the main ideas using
Kadanoﬀ’s block spin transformation,
which is rather intuitive.

(9.68)

so that the theory obtained with a block spin transformation describes
the same macroscopic physics. In general, H  [Sn ], as determined by the
above equation, will contain also interaction terms that are not present in
H, so the evolution of the couplings should really be followed in a multiparameter space of coupling constants, rather than being restricted to
the coupling K. For the moment, we neglect this aspect to simplify the
presentation of the main ideas.
If K describes the interaction on a microscopic scale a, K2 describes
the eﬀective interaction on the scale 2a. We can then iterate the procedure, performing this block spin transformation over the Sn variables,
again regrouping four of them together; since the Hamiltonian still has
the same form as in eq. (9.64), with just the replacement K → f (K),
the eﬀective coupling at the scale 4a will be
K3 ≡ f (K2 ) = f (f (K)) .

(9.69)

n

We can iterate the procedure n times, until 2 a becomes almost of order
aξ. What we gain by this procedure is that at each stage the number of
eﬀective spin variables which are strongly correlated among themselves
has been thinned. In fact, in terms of the variable Sn , the new (dimensionless) correlation length is ξ1 = ξ0 /2 (where ξ0 is the correlation
length of the original variables si ), since the spacing between the spins
Sn is 2a. After n steps the correlation length is ξn = ξ0 /2n . When this
number becomes of order one, collective eﬀects do not play any role, and
the physics of the system can simply be read oﬀ the eﬀective Hamiltonian. Therefore the coupling Kn obtained iterating n times the block
spin transformation, i.e. the coupling deﬁned by
Kn = f (Kn−1 ) ,

(9.70)

9.5

QFT and critical phenomena 235

with the initial condition K1 = K, is the eﬀective coupling which describes the physics at the length-scale l = 2n a.
The relation with the renormalization group equations discussed in
Section 5.9 now emerges. What we ﬁnd, either using the QFT language
in Section 5.9 or the language of statistical mechanics in this section, is
that the behavior of the theory is described by eﬀective coupling constants that depend on a length-scale l (or equivalently on an energy-scale
1/l). In statistical mechanics l represents the scale over which microscopic ﬂuctuations have been averaged out while, in QFT, 1/l is the
cutoﬀ in momentum space. All the necessary information is encoded
in the functions that describe how the couplings change as we change
the scale: the beta function in Section 5.9 or the function f (K) in this
section.
We see that the problem of taking into account the collective action of
many degrees of freedom when the correlation length is large has been
translated into the problem of computing the function f (K). This can
be a very diﬃcult task, so it might seem that we have simply translated
a diﬃcult problem into another diﬃcult problem. However, the power
of the method emerges in connection with the notion of ﬁxed point. A
ﬁxed point Kc is deﬁned as a solution of the equation
Kc = f (Kc ) .

(9.71)

Observe that ξn is a function of Kn , i.e. ξn = ξ(Kn ). Since ξn+1 = ξn /2,
the function ξ(K) must satisfy
ξ[f (K)] =

1
ξ(K) .
2

(9.72)

At the ﬁxed point Kc = f (Kc ) so ξ(Kc ) = (1/2)ξ(Kc ), which has two
solutions, ξ(Kc ) = ∞ and ξ(Kc ) = 0. We see from eq. (9.63) that the
latter case is of no interest for constructing an interacting continuum
QFT, and is called a “trivial” ﬁxed point. The ﬁxed points corresponding
to ξ(Kc ) = ∞ are instead called “critical”.
In a general system, the space of coupling constants will be multidimensional, and one must also take into account that, even if a term is
not originally present in the microscopic Hamiltonian, it will be generated by the RG transformation, unless it is protected by some symmetry. Therefore we will have a RG ﬂow in this multidimensional (actually,
inﬁnite-dimensional) space. However, most of the couplings will be simply driven to zero by the RG transformation. The operators with whom
they are associated in the Lagrangian are termed irrelevant.
In the space of the remaining couplings, the RG ﬂow will be basically
determined by the ﬁxed-point structure. Barring more exotic possibilities, like chaotic behavior, the RG trajectory will ﬂow either to inﬁnity
or toward the ﬁxed points.
A hypothetical example of a ﬂow in a two-dimensional parameter
space is shown in Fig. 9.5. In this ﬁgure we have drawn the critical
surface, that is the surface in the parameter space where ξ = ∞, and
other surfaces at constant ξ. We have considered a situation in which

C

ξ=







B

ξ = 10






A

ξ =1














P0

Fig. 9.5 An example of RG ﬂow

with three ﬁxed points A, B, C on
the critical surface and a ﬁxed point
P0 at ξ = 0.

236 Path integral quantization

on the critical surface there are three ﬁxed points, labeled A, B and C.
Furthermore, there is a trivial ﬁxed point P0 with ξ = 0. Each point on
this graph corresponds to a set of values for the couplings, i.e. a physical
Hamiltonian in the language of statistical mechanics, or a bare QFT in
ﬁeld-theoretical language. Since under a RG step ξ → ξ/2, if we apply
the transformation to a point on the critical surface we remain on the
critical surface, while if we start at ξ ﬁnite we will be eventually driven
to the ﬁxed point at ξ = 0.
A very important property of a ﬁxed point is its stability. In Fig. 9.5
P0 is a stable ﬁxed point: the ﬂow is such that, if we start inﬁnitesimally
close to P0 in any direction, the RG transformation will bring us toward
P0 . All ﬁxed points on the critical surface have instead at least one unstable direction, which is the direction orthogonal to the critical surface
itself: if we start close to the critical surface, but not exactly on it, the
RG transformation decreases ξ and drives us further away from the critical surface. The ﬁxed points A and C have one stable direction along
the critical surface, while B has instead a second unstable direction.
Points that are on the same RG trajectory describe the same macroscopic physics, by construction of the RG transformation, see eq. (9.68).
In principle, each point on the critical surface is suitable for removing
the cutoﬀ and deﬁning a renormalized QFT, since there ξ = ∞ and
a = 0. However, these theories are not all physically diﬀerent. Since a
RG trajectory connects equivalent theories, all the points on the critical
surface that lie in the attraction basin of the same ﬁxed point correspond
to equivalent theories. In other words, the space of possible renormalized
QFT is split into equivalence classes, known as universality classes, in
one-to-one correspondence with the ﬁxed points on the critical surface.
Universality is a powerful concept to explain why statistical systems
with very diﬀerent microscopic Hamiltonians turn out to have the same
critical behavior, and in particular the same critical indices. For instance, for a generic system with one coupling constant K, we have seen
in eq. (9.67) that near the critical coupling Kc
ξ(K) 

c
,
(K − Kc )ν

with c a constant. Combining this with eq. (9.72), we have

ν
f (K) − Kc
= 2.
lim
K→Kc
K − Kc

(9.73)

(9.74)

Close to the critical point, f (K)  Kc + f  (Kc )(K − Kc ) and, substiν
tuting into eq. (9.74), we get [f  (Kc )] = 2, or
ν=

log 2
.
log f  (Kc )

(9.75)

This shows that the critical index ν depends only on the form of the
function f (K) near the critical point, and not on the microscopic details
of the Hamiltonian. In particular, all Hamiltonians that lie on the same
RG trajectory describe systems that, even if apparently very diﬀerent

9.5

QFT and critical phenomena 237

on the microscopic scale, have the same value of ν. The above results
also nicely illustrate how the non-analytic behavior (9.73) emerges as a
result of collective behavior, from a regular Hamiltonian and an analytic
function f (K).
In the context of QFT, universality means ﬁrst of all that (at least
within a universality class) the renormalized theory does not depend on
the details of the regularization. Universality however is important also
for a diﬀerent reason. In Section 5.9 we saw that we can write the RG
equations in two diﬀerent forms:
(1) We can write them as equations that govern the dependence of the
bare coupling constants on the cutoﬀ, as in eq. (5.164). With a lattice
cutoﬀ Λ = 1/a, eq. (5.164) reads
a

dg0
= −β(g0 (a)) ,
da

(9.76)

where, in the general case of many coupling constants, g0 and β are
vectors in the coupling constant space.
(2) We can write the RG equations in the form of equations that
govern the dependence of the renormalized coupling constants on the
energy. From eq. (5.178), setting E = uµ (where µ is the reference
scale),
dgeﬀ
= β(geﬀ (E)) .
(9.77)
E
dE
Both eqs. (9.76) and (9.77) originated from eq. (5.161), in the former
case taking the derivative with respect to the cutoﬀ and in the latter
with respect to the renormalization point µ.
Equation (9.76), as we have seen, can be understood in the language
of critical phenomena, because the cutoﬀ a can be interpreted as the
physical lattice spacing of a condensed matter system, and a change in
cutoﬀ as the result of taking into account collective eﬀects. However,
eq. (9.77) has the same form as eq. (9.76), so we can again apply the
notions of ﬁxed points, universality, etc. While in eq. (9.76) the ﬁxed
points are at ξ = 0, ∞ (i.e. when the momentum space cutoﬀ 1/a is 0
or ∞), in eq. (9.77) they will be at E = 0 or at E = ∞. In eq. (9.76)
only the ﬁxed points at ξ = ∞ were interesting in the QFT context.
In eq. (9.77), instead, both types of ﬁxed points are very interesting; a
ﬁxed point at E = 0 (called an infrared, or simply IR, ﬁxed point) can
govern the behavior of a theory at low energies while a ﬁxed point at
E = ∞ (called a UV ﬁxed point) will be relevant at high energies.
This can be understood from Figs. 9.6 and 9.7, where for simplicity
we take the space of coupling constants to be one-dimensional. We
consider a theory with a beta function which vanishes at geﬀ = 0 (the
perturbative ﬁxed point, which always exists) and which furthermore
has a zero at a value geﬀ = gc . In Fig. 9.6 the beta function is positive
for 0 < geﬀ < gc and negative for geﬀ > gc . From this, it follows that a
solution of eq. (9.77), as E → ∞, will always be attracted toward g eﬀ =
gc , independently of the initial value g(µ). In fact, if 0 < g(µ) < gc ,
β(geﬀ ) > 0, therefore dgeﬀ /dE > 0 and geﬀ (E) increases asymptotically











β ( g)
































g





gc
















Fig. 9.6 An example of a beta func-

tion with two zeros, such that g = 0
is an IR ﬁxed point and g = gc is a
UV ﬁxed point.




















β ( g)
































































































































gc














g












Fig. 9.7 Reversing the sign of the

beta function, g = 0 becomes a UV
ﬁxed point and g = gc an IR ﬁxed
point.

238 Path integral quantization

toward gc . Conversely, if the initial value g(µ) > gc , the beta function
is negative and geﬀ (E) decreases toward gc . Therefore in this example
gc is a UV ﬁxed point. Universality manifests itself in the fact that the
large-energy properties of the theory are governed by this value of the
coupling, irrespectively of the initial value of g(µ).
To study the limit E → 0, instead, we can run the RG ﬂow backward
and, again using Fig. 9.6, we see that, if 0 < g(µ) < gc , geﬀ (E) runs
toward zero as E → 0 while, if g(µ) > gc , geﬀ (E) runs toward inﬁnity.
Therefore g = 0 is an IR ﬁxed point (with attraction domain 0 < g(µ) <
gc ), and all theories in this universality class become free at low energies.
In Fig. 9.7 we have reversed the sign of the beta function, and the
same analysis as above shows that now g = 0 is a UV ﬁxed point with
attraction domain 0 < g(µ) < gc , while in the infrared the theory ﬂows
at gc .
In QCD, the beta function has only the perturbative zero at g = 0,
and is negative for g > 0. There is no other ﬁxed point. Therefore the
theory in the UV ﬂows to g = 0, which is the property of asymptotic
freedom that we already mentioned in Section 5.9. In the IR limit the
coupling grows large and enters in the strong coupling domain, where
perturbative methods cannot be applied.

9.6

QFT at ﬁnite temperature

Another interesting application of the path integral technique is to QFT
at ﬁnite temperature. To understand this relation we consider ﬁrst
quantum mechanics and we start from eq. (9.15), written using the
Schrödinger representation,
qf |e−iĤ(Tf −Ti ) |qi =

 q(Tf )=qf

[dq] eiS .

(9.78)

q(Ti )=qi

We now rotate from Minkowski to Euclidean space, t → −it, so that
exp{−iHt} becomes exp{−Ht}, while eiS/ becomes e−S/ , as discussed
in the previous section. In this section, the notation t will hereafter
denote Euclidean time. Then eq. (9.78) becomes
qf |e−β Ĥ |qi =

 q(Tf )=qf

[dq] e−S ,

(9.79)

q(Ti )=qi

where β ≡ Tf − Ti and Ti , Tf are the minimum and maximum values of
Euclidean time; S is the Euclidean action so, for a particle in a potential
V,
1
S = mq̇ 2 + V (q) .
(9.80)
2
We now take qi = qf ≡ q and we sum over all possible values of q,


q| e−β Ĥ |q =
[dq] e−S ,
(9.81)
q

q(t)=q(t+β)

9.7

where the sum is over all possible conﬁgurations with q(Ti ) = q(Tf ) or,
in other words, over all periodic conﬁgurations with period β = Tf − Ti .
Since the states |q form a complete set, the left-hand side is the trace
of e−β Ĥ over the Hilbert space, so we ﬁnd the relation

−β Ĥ
=
[dq] e−S .
(9.82)
tr e
q(t)=q(t+β)

For a scalar ﬁeld theory we can perform the same steps with just a
change in notation, and we get

tr e−β Ĥ =
Dφ e−S ,
(9.83)
φ(x ,t)=φ(x ,t+β)

with S the Euclidean action given in eq. (9.54) and H the ﬁeld theory
Hamiltonian. The left-hand side of eq. (9.82) or eq. (9.83) is the thermal
partition function of a system with Hamiltonian H, at a temperature
given by kB T = 1/β. This means that the thermal averages of the
system can be computed using the path integral, restricting to paths
periodic in Euclidean time.
From a practical point of view, in quantum mechanics it is simpler
to compute directly the trace on the left-hand side of eq. (9.82) using
the operator formalism. In QFT, instead, it is usually much simpler to
evaluate the path integral in eq. (9.83).

9.7

Solved problems

Problem 9.1. Instantons and tunneling
It happens in many theories that, beside the trivial solution φ = 0, there
are other, non-trivial, solutions of the Euclidean equations of motion, which
vanish at inﬁnity. A typical situation is given by solutions which describe
tunneling phenomena between diﬀerent vacua. We consider the action of a
scalar ﬁeld theory in D Euclidean dimensions,
»
–
Z
1
∂µ φ∂µ φ + V (φ) ,
(9.84)
SE = d D x
2
„
«2
m2 2
φ
,
(9.85)
φ 1−
2
η
so we have a mass term, a cubic and a quartic coupling. As a ﬁrst step, we
restrict to D = 1, so the action is
»
–
Z
1
2
SE = dt
(9.86)
(∂t φ) + V (φ) .
2

and we choose

V (φ) =

This is Euclidean quantum mechanics, with φ(t) playing the role of the position
q(t). However, we will still use the notation φ and the typical ﬁeld theory
language, to emphasize that many general ideas carry through (with some
qualiﬁcations to be discussed below) in ﬁeld theory in D Euclidean dimensions.

Solved problems 239

240 Path integral quantization

-V

φ

Fig.

9.8 The

against φ.

function

−V (φ)

This potential has two degenerate minima: one is at φ = 0 and, in the
ﬁeld theory language, it is the perturbative vacuum; the other is located at
φ = η. Of course, with a redeﬁnition of the ﬁeld of the form φ → φ − η we
could shift the rightmost minimum at φ = 0 and call this the perturbative
vacuum; in any case, the point is that there are two minima, and perturbation
theory is deﬁned as an expansion around one of them. So we choose φ = 0 as
the perturbative vacuum, and we study the path integral with the boundary
conditions that the ﬁeld goes to zero as t → ±∞. We now ask whether
there are classical solutions of the equations of motion with these boundary
conditions. One is obviously the perturbative vacuum, φ(t) = 0 for all t. To
search for other solutions, observe that formally eq. (9.86) is the same as the
action of a particle with coordinate φ(t) and unit mass, moving in Minkowski
space in a potential −V (φ), shown in Fig. 9.8. From this formal analogy we
immediately understand that there is a solution starting at t = −∞ at φ = 0
with a “speed” φ̇ → 0+ , which approaches the point φ = η at t = +∞. In the
original Minkowskian ﬁeld theory, φ = 0 and φ = η are the two degenerate
vacua, separated by a potential barrier, and therefore this Euclidean solution,
from the point of view of Minkowski ﬁeld theory, represents a tunneling process
between the two vacua. We will call this Euclidean solution an “instanton”.
Actually, this solution does not satisfy our boundary conditions, since φ = 0
at t → +∞. However, there is also a solution, that we call an anti-instanton,
which goes from φ = η to φ = 0, and we can combine the two solutions to
obtain a path that starts and ends at φ = 0; for instance we can consider a
path that starts at φ = > 0. This will reach an inversion point close to
φ = η and then will go back to φ = . In the limit → 0+ we get the desired
¯ pair.
solution, which is called an instanton–anti-instanton (I I)
The path integral can therefore be approximated as a sum of two terms:
the contributions of the small ﬂuctuations around the perturbative vacuum
φ = 0, which reproduces the perturbative expansion, and the contribution of
the ﬂuctuations around the I I¯ pair. The latter gives an example of a nonperturbative contribution. Let φ0 (t) be the I I¯ classical solution. We can write
a small ﬂuctuation over φ0 in the form
φ = φ0 + ϕ ,

(9.87)

with ϕ small. The action can be expanded in powers of ϕ as
S[φ] = S[φ0 ] + S2 [ϕ] + S3 [ϕ] + . . . ,

(9.88)

where S2 is quadratic in ϕ, S3 is cubic, etc. It is important that there is no
term linear in ϕ, since φ0 is a classical solution and therefore is an extremum
of the action.
Then the contribution to the path integral coming from the ﬂuctuations
over φ0 is
Z
Dϕ e−(S2 [ϕ]+S3 [ϕ]+...) .
(9.89)
e−S[φ0 ]
We see that this contribution is proportional to e−S[φ0 ] , where S[φ0 ] ≡ SI Ī is
the action of the I I¯ conﬁguration, or more generally of the classical conﬁguration over which we are expanding. In this example, we have SI I¯ = SI + SI¯ =
2SI so to compute SI I¯ we must ﬁnd explicitly the instanton solution and its
action SI . In this model this is easily done: the equation of motion is
«„
«
„
φ
φ
2
1−2
,
(9.90)
φ̈ = m φ 1 −
η
η

9.7
and the instanton solution, which interpolates between φ = 0 at t = −∞ and
φ = η at t = +∞, is
η
.
(9.91)
φ(t) =
1 + exp{−mt}
Inserting this into eq. (9.86) and setting τ = mt/2 we ﬁnd
Z
mη 2
1
mη 2 ∞
SI =
=
.
(9.92)
dτ
4
8
6
cosh τ
−∞
Observe that the coeﬃcient of the φ4 term in the action (9.84, 9.85) is m2 /(2η 2 ).
We then deﬁne the quartic self-coupling λ from λ/4! = m2 /(2η 2 ), and we see
that the contribution to the path integral of the small ﬂuctuations over this
classical conﬁgurations is proportional to
n co
,
(9.93)
e−2SI = exp −
λ
with c = 4m3 . The fact that c is not adimensional is due to the fact that
in D = 1 the coupling λ is not adimensional. The important point is that
this contribution is non-analytic in the coupling λ and can never be seen in
a perturbative expansion around λ = 0; the Taylor expansion of the function f (x) = exp{−1/x} around x = 0 is in fact identically zero. Instantons
therefore provide an example of non-perturbative contributions that cannot
be computed in a perturbative expansion in terms of Feynman graphs. Parametrically, as λ → 0, exp{−c/λ} is smaller than any power of λ; therefore, in
a theory in which the renormalized coupling is suﬃciently small, like in QED,
eﬀects of this type are negligible. However, in a theory like QCD where the
coupling is strong, non-perturbative eﬀects are important.
The generalization to D > 1 Euclidean dimensions is not completely straightforward. For instance, if we start with eq. (9.84), we might look for a classical
solution φ(t, x) which is independent of x. Then we would just ﬁnd again the
solution φ(t) discussed above. However now its action contains also a divergent volume factor coming from the integration over the spatial coordinates,
and therefore the contribution to the path integral of these conﬁgurations is
∼ e−∞ = 0. Thus we must look for solutions whose action is localized not only
in time, as in eq. (9.92), but also in space. Solutions of this type turn out to
exist in a number of interesting theories, including QCD, and are generically
called instantons.

Summary of chapter
• In the path integral formulation of quantum mechanics the position
and momentum (and any other variable) remain c-numbers rather
than being promoted to operators. The amplitudes are computed
summing over all possible trajectories with the given boundary
conditions, weighting each trajectory with eiS (or e−S in Euclidean
space). The connection between the operator formalism and the
path integral quantization is provided by eqs. (9.15) and (9.25).
• The vacuum expectation value of a T -product of ﬁelds can be
computed performing a path integral over all ﬁeld conﬁgurations
that go to zero at inﬁnity, eq. (9.29). The perturbative expansion
is recovered writing the action as S = S2 + Sint , where S2 is the

Solved problems 241

242 Path integral quantization

part quadratic in the ﬁelds and Sint the interaction term. The
inverse of the operator which appears in S2 gives the propagator,
and the perturbative expansion is reproduced expanding eiS (or
e−S in Euclidean space) in powers of Sint .
• An important aspect of the path integral formulation is that it
allows us to deﬁne the theory non-perturbatively, and it makes it
possible to compute (at least in principle, or with suitable numerical or semiclassical techniques) terms non-analytic in the coupling
constant.
• The Euclidean formulation of the path integral reveals deep connections between QFT and critical phenomena. The bare Green’s
functions of a QFT in d spatial dimensions are equivalent to the
physical correlation functions of a statistical system living in d + 1
spatial dimensions. The dependence of the bare coupling constants
on the cutoﬀ in QFT can then be understood, in the language
of statistical mechanics, as a result of the collective interaction
between many degrees of freedom when the correlation length is
large, and can be computed “integrating out” the small scale ﬂuctuations. This generates the RG transformation. The existence
of ﬁxed points of the RG transformation leads to the notion of
universality.

Further reading
• A clear and concise review of the path integral technique can be found in Appendix A of Polchinski
(1998). For more details on the path integral see
Peskin and Schroeder (1995), Chapter 9. For the
path integral quantization of gauge theories see also
Ramond (1990).
• For the connection between QFT and critical phenomena, the original review papers are still excellent readings; a classical reference is K. G. Wilson
and J. B. Kogut, Phys. Rept. 12 (1974) 75. See also

J.B. Kogut, Rev. Mod. Phys. 51 (1979) 659. For a
historical perspective of the developments leading
to renormalization group and the relation between
QFT and critical phenomena, see the Nobel lecture
of K. Wilson, Rev. Mod. Phys. 55 (1983) 583.
• Two advanced books on the relations between ﬁeld
theory and critical phenomena are Parisi (1988)
and Zinn-Justin (2002).
• For instantons, a classical reference is Coleman
(1985). See also Chapter 39 of Zinn-Justin (2002).

10

Non-abelian gauge theories
In this chapter we introduce non-abelian gauge theories, or Yang–Mills
theories. Their importance stems from the fact that strong interactions are described by a non-abelian gauge theory with gauge group
SU (3), known as quantum chromodynamics or QCD, while the electromagnetic and weak interactions are uniﬁed in a gauge theory with
gauge group SU (2) × U (1), the electroweak theory. Together, QCD
and the electroweak theory form the Standard Model, which to date
reproduces all known experimental results of particle physics, up to energies of the order of a few hundred GeV. To have an idea of the degree of accuracy of these measurements, we mention that the mass of
the Z 0 boson is measured with a precision of almost two parts in 105 ,
mZ = 91.1876(21) GeV, its width is ΓZ = 2.4952(23) GeV, and many
other observables are known with a precision of the order of a few parts
in 103 .
A full presentation of the Standard Model is beyond the scope of this
course. In this and the next chapter we will however introduce two of its
main ingredients, namely Yang–Mills theories and the Higgs mechanism.
Non-abelian gauge theories, beside having an extraordinary experimental success, have also a very rich theoretical structure, at the classical
and especially at the quantum level. Within the scope of this course, we
can only limit ourselves to just a few elementary aspects; in particular,
we will discuss how to generalize gauge transformations to non-abelian
groups and how to write the corresponding invariant Lagrangians.

10.1

Non-abelian gauge transformations

As a ﬁrst step, it is useful to rewrite the abelian gauge transformation of
electrodynamics in a form more suitable for generalization. We saw in
Chapter 3 that electrodynamics has a local U (1) gauge invariance. We
write a generic x-dependent U (1) element as
U (x) = eiθ(x) ,

(10.1)

with 0  θ(x)  2π. A ﬁeld Ψ with charge q transforms as
Ψ(x) → Uq (x)Ψ(x)

(10.2)

where Uq (x) = eiqθ(x) is a representation of the U (1) transformation, labeled by the parameter q. The transformation of the gauge ﬁeld instead
is
(10.3)
Aµ (x) → Aµ (x) − ∂µ θ .

10.1 Non-abelian gauge
transformations

243

10.2 Yang–Mills theory

246

10.3 QCD

248

10.4 Fields in the adjoint
representation

250

244 Non-abelian gauge theories

In terms of the gauge group element U (x), this can be rewritten as
Aµ (x) → Aµ + i(∂µ U )U † .

(10.4)

We make the (obvious) observation that the transformation law of Aµ
is an intrinsic property of the gauge ﬁeld, and does not know anything
about q, which instead is a parameter that labels the representation to
which the matter ﬁeld Ψ belongs. The coupling between Aµ and Ψ is
obtained using the covariant derivative, eq. (3.167), which depends on
q, i.e. on the representation to which Ψ belongs,
Dµ Ψ = (∂µ + iqAµ )Ψ .

(10.5)

The important property of the covariant derivative is that, even under
x-dependent transformations, it transforms in the same way as Ψ,
Dµ Ψ → Uq (x)Dµ Ψ ,

1

We recall a few basic facts about the
group SU (N ). It has N 2 − 1 generators T a , which are hermitian and satisfy Tr T a = 0. By deﬁnition they obey
the Lie algebra [T a , T b ] = if abc T c ,
where f abc are the structure constants
of SU (N ), which are completely antisymmetric and real. For example, for
a is a repreSU (2), f abc = abc . If TR
sentation of the algebra and V a unitary matrix of the same dimension as
a , then V T a V † is still a solution of
TR
R
the Lie algebra and therefore provides
an equivalent representation. We can
ﬁx V requiring that it diagonalizes the
a T b ), so that
matrix D ab (R) ≡ Tr (TR
R
a T b ) = C(R)δ ab . The normalizaTr (TR
R
tion factor C(R) is ﬁxed (since the Lie
algebra is not invariant under a rescaling of T a ) and it depends on the representation R. For SU (N ), it turns out
that C(R) = 1/2 for the fundamental representation and C(R) = N for
the adjoint representation; the reader
can check it for SU (2), using T i =
σi /2 for the fundamental and (T i )jk =
−i ijk for the adjoint, as we discussed
in eq. (2.37). By deﬁnition for SU (N )
we raise or lower the index a with δ ab ,
so we will conventionally always write it
as an upper index, and repeated upper
indices are summed over.

(10.6)

as we already saw in eq. (3.168). As discussed in Section 3.5.4, using
covariant derivatives there is a very simple way to construct a theory
with local U (1) invariance: we start from a theory with global U (1)
invariance and we just replace all the ordinary derivatives with covariant derivatives. This method of coupling matter to the electromagnetic
ﬁeld is known as the minimal coupling. We have also seen, again in
Section 3.5.4, that non-minimal couplings are also possible, but they are
characterized by coupling constants with dimensions of inverse powers
of mass. From the discussion in Section 5.8 and the explicit example of
the Fermi theory presented in Section 8.1, we understand that couplings
with inverse mass dimensions are less fundamental than dimensionless
couplings, and emerge as the low-energy limit of some more fundamental
dimensionless coupling. Therefore, it is the minimal coupling that we
want to generalize.
We ﬁnd it convenient to redeﬁne θ(x) → eθ(x), where e < 0 is the
electron charge. Therefore we write
U (x) = eieθ(x) ,

(10.7)

where now 0  θ(x)  2π/|e|, and the gauge transformation becomes
Ψ(x) → eiqeθ(x) Ψ(x) ,

(10.8)

i
Aµ (x) → Aµ + (∂µ U )U † .
(10.9)
e
We want to generalize the above transformations to the case where
U (x) belongs to a non-abelian group G, rather than just to U (1), and
we want to construct a Lagrangian invariant under such local transformations. We will limit ourselves to the the case G = SU (N ), although
the construction is very general; G is called the gauge group.1
We start by generalizing eq. (10.8). We consider a set of ﬁelds Ψ α (x)
transforming in a given representation R of the gauge group. The ﬁelds

10.1

Non-abelian gauge transformations 245

are then labeled by an index α = 1, . . . , dim (R). For deﬁniteness we
take Ψα to be Dirac fermions, but all the subsequent considerations are
very general and apply to any matter ﬁelds, e.g. to bosonic ﬁelds or to
Weyl fermions.
The fact that Ψ transforms in the representation R means that, under
a gauge transformation,
Ψ → UR Ψ ,

(10.10)

or, in components, Ψα (x) → (UR )α β (x)Ψβ (x). In eq. (10.10),
UR (x) = exp{igθa (x)TRa } ,

(10.11)

where TRa are the generators of the gauge group in the representation R
and θa (x) are the parameters of the transformation. We have redeﬁned
the parameters θ a (x) → gθa (x), where g is a constant. We will see below
that g will be the coupling constant of the theory.
The free Dirac Lagrangian,
Lfree = iΨ̄α γ µ ∂µ Ψα ,

(10.12)

(with the sum over the index α understood) is invariant under global
SU (N ) transformations, since if Ψ → UR Ψ then Ψ̄ → UR† and, if UR is
independent of x, it goes through ∂µ and cancels against UR† . However,
if UR depends on x, performing the transformation we also get a term
proportional to ∂µ U and this Lagrangian is no longer invariant.
To construct an invariant Lagrangian, we introduce a set of gauge
ﬁelds Aaµ labeled by an index a, with one gauge ﬁeld for each generator
of the gauge group; the Aaµ are called non-abelian gauge ﬁelds. In particular, SU (N ) has N 2 − 1 generators, so we have three gauge ﬁelds for
SU (2) and eight gauge ﬁelds for SU (3). We introduce the matrix ﬁeld
Aµ (x) = Aaµ (x)T a .

(10.13)

Of course Aaµ does not depend on the representation (just as in electromagnetism the gauge ﬁeld, and therefore its transformation properties,
does not know anything about the parameter q that labels the matter
representation), while the generators T a , and therefore the matrix Aµ ,
have an explicit form which depends on the representation R. We deﬁne
the gauge transformation of Aµ as
i
Aµ → U Aµ U † − (∂µ U )U † ,
g

(10.14)

where Aµ = Aaµ (x)TRa and U (x) = exp{igθ a (x)TRa } are in the same representation R. This deﬁnition is consistent because the transformation
that it induces on Aaµ is independent of R, as it should be. This can be
shown considering ﬁrst an inﬁnitesimal transformation,
U (x) = 1 + igθa (x)TRa + O(θ2 ) .

(10.15)

246 Non-abelian gauge theories

Then eq. (10.14) becomes
i
Aaµ TRa → (1 + igθa TRa )Abµ TRb (1 − igθc TRc ) − (igTRa ∂µ θa ) + O(θ2 )
g
= Aaµ TRa + igθa Abµ [TRa , TRb ] + TRa ∂µ θa + O(θ2 ) .
(10.16)
Therefore
Aaµ → Aaµ + ∂µ θa − gf abc θb Acµ + O(θ2 ) ,

2

We take g > 0, while the electron
charge is e < 0. This is the origin of
some apparent sign diﬀerences in the
deﬁnitions for the U (1) and the nonabelian case.

(10.17)

and no dependence on the representation R appears. For Lie groups the
inﬁnitesimal transformation ﬁxes uniquely also the ﬁnite transformation,
and therefore even the ﬁnite transformation of Aaµ is independent of
R. Equation (10.14) generalizes eq. (10.9) to non-abelian groups. The
constant g will play the role of the gauge coupling, as we will see below.2
In particular, under a global gauge transformation, Aµ → U Aµ U † . It
is interesting to ask what this transformation property means in terms
of the N 2 − 1 ﬁelds Aaµ , and we will see in Section 10.4 that it means
that, under global gauge transformations, Aaµ → (Uadj )a b Abµ , where Uadj
is the adjoint representation of the gauge group.
We now deﬁne the covariant derivative on the ﬁeld Ψ as


Dµ Ψ = ∂µ − ig Aaµ TRa Ψ ,

(10.18)

where TRa are the generators in the same representation R as the ﬁeld
Ψ. Using eqs. (10.10) and (10.14) we see that


i
†
†
Dµ Ψ → ∂µ (UR Ψ) − ig UR Aµ UR − (∂µ UR )UR UR Ψ = UR Dµ Ψ ,
g
(10.19)
where we used the fact that Aaµ TRa transforms with the same matrix UR
which appears in the transformation of Ψ. Therefore Dµ Ψ transforms
in the same way as Ψ, even under local transformations.

10.2

Yang–Mills theory

Using the covariant derivative, it is now easy to write a Lagrangian with
local non-abelian gauge invariance. We just replace ∂µ → Dµ in the free
theory, that is, we write

Ψ̄α [iγ µ (Dµ Ψ)α − mΨα ] .
(10.20)
L=
α

This Lagrangian contains the kinetic term of the fermionic ﬁeld and its
interaction with the gauge ﬁelds. The interaction term, which is hidden
in the covariant derivative, is
Lint = gAaµ Ψ̄α γ µ (TRa )αβ Ψβ ,

(10.21)

and we see that g is a coupling constant. We also need a kinetic term
for the gauge ﬁelds. One might try to deﬁne the ﬁeld strength tensor of

10.2

Yang–Mills theory 247

a
each of the gauge ﬁelds Aaµ as Fµν
= ∂µ Aaν − ∂ν Aaµ , but it is immediate
to verify that this quantity does not have any simple transformation
property under (10.14). Instead, a straightforward computation (using
the identity 0 = ∂µ (U U † ) = (∂µ U )U † + U (∂µ U † ) and therefore ∂µ U † =
−U † (∂µ U )U † ) shows that the quantity

Fµν = ∂µ Aν − ∂ν Aµ − ig[Aµ , Aν ]

(10.22)

Fµν (x) → U (x)Fµν (x)U † (x) .

(10.23)

transforms as

Fµν is called the non-abelian ﬁeld strength. From eqs. (10.22) and
(10.13) we see that we can rewrite Fµν as
a
Fµν = Fµν
Ta

(10.24)

a
Fµν
= ∂µ Aaν − ∂ν Aaµ + gf abc Abµ Acν .

(10.25)

with

Now it is easy to construct a gauge-invariant kinetic term for the gauge
ﬁeld; it is given by
1 a a µν
1
Lgauge = − Tr Fµν F µν = − Fµν
F
,
2
4

(10.26)

where Fµν has been taken in the fundamental representation, and we
used the fact that Tr(TFa TFb ) = (1/2)δ ab . Under gauge transformations
Tr Fµν F µν → Tr (U Fµν F µν U † ) = Tr Fµν F µν due to the cyclic property
of the trace.
The complete Lagrangian of the SU (N ) Yang–Mills theory with Dirac
fermions in the representation R is therefore
1 a a µν
F
, (10.27)
LYM = iΨ̄α  ∂ Ψα −mΨ̄α Ψα +gAaµ Ψ̄α γ µ (TRa )αβ Ψβ − Fµν
4
or, in more compact form,
LYM = Ψ̄ (iD − m) Ψ −

1
Tr Fµν F µν .
2

(10.28)

Observe, from eq. (10.25), that the term F 2 contains not only the
standard kinetic term of the gauge ﬁelds, but also an interaction vertex with three gauge bosons, proportional to g, and a vertex with four
gauge bosons, proportional to g 2 , as shown in Fig. 10.1. Observe also
that gauge invariance has ﬁxed the three-boson, four-boson, and boson–
fermion–fermion vertices in terms of a single parameter, the gauge coupling g.

Fig. 10.1 The vertices with three

and with four non-abelian gauge
bosons.

248 Non-abelian gauge theories

10.3

QCD

Quantum chromodynamics (QCD) is a Yang–Mills theory with gauge
group SU (3). The matter ﬁelds are the quarks. They are in the fundamental representation of the gauge group and have spin 1/2. As we
already discussed in Chapter 8, there are six type of quarks, denoted as
u (up), d (down), c (charm), s (strange), t (top) and b (bottom). The
type of quark is called the ﬂavor, while the index of the gauge group is
called the color index. Therefore a generic quark ﬁeld has two indices,
Ψα,A with α = 1, 2, 3 the color index and A = u, d, c, s, t, b the ﬂavor index. Each quark ﬂavor is described by a Lagrangian of the type (10.27),
with a diﬀerent mass for each ﬂavor. The 32 − 1 = 8 gauge bosons are
called gluons. Therefore the QCD Lagrangian is
LQCD = iΨ̄α,A  ∂ Ψα,A − mA Ψ̄α,A Ψα,A −

1 a a µν
F F
4 µν

a
+gAaµ Ψ̄α,A γ µ Tαβ
Ψβ,A ,

(10.29)

where we sum over both the color indices α, β and the ﬂavor index A,
and T a are the generators of SU (3) in the fundamental representation.
QCD is the fundamental theory of strong interactions. A crucial property of QCD, that we already discussed in Sections 5.9 and 9.5, is asymptotic freedom, which means that the running coupling constant geﬀ (E)
(deﬁned in Section 5.9) is small at high energies and large at low energies.
At small distances QCD is well described in terms of weakly interacting
quarks and gluons, while at large distances, of the order of 1 fm, the
theory becomes non-perturbative and quarks are conﬁned. This means
that quarks cannot be observed as free particles, but we can only observe color-singlet bound states of quark–antiquarks (mesons) or of three
quarks or three antiquarks (baryons). Mesons and baryons are collectively denoted as hadrons and, being composed of quarks, are subject
to strong interactions. The strong interactions generate dynamically a
characteristic energy scale ΛQCD ∼ (1 fm)−1  200 MeV. The lightest
hadron is the pion, whose mass is in fact of this order of magnitude,
mπ  140 MeV.
Besides the exact local SU (3) color symmetry, QCD also has important approximate global symmetries, due to the possibility of performing a coordinate-independent rotation in ﬂavor space. We saw in Section 3.4.3 that the free Lagrangian of a single massless Dirac fermion
has a U (1) × U (1) symmetry, in which we rotate independently the lefthanded and right-handed Weyl spinors,
ψL → eiθL ψL ,

ψR → eiθR ψR .

(10.30)

In terms of the Dirac spinor Ψ the two independent transformations with
θR = θL = α and θR = −θL = β have been written in eqs. (3.125) and
(3.126), and we recall them here,
Ψ → eiα Ψ ,

5

Ψ → eiβγ Ψ .

(10.31)

10.3

QCD 249

The transformation parametrized by α is called the vector U (1), while
the one parametrized by β is called the axial U (1), or UA (1).
Consider now the QCD Lagrangian with Nf quark ﬂavors Ψ1 , . . . , ΨNf
(i.e. Ψ1 is the Dirac spinor describing the u-quark, Ψ2 the d-quark, etc.).
Denote by qL a column vector with Nf components whose entries are
N
1
the Weyl spinors ψL
, . . . , ψL f which describes the left-handed quarks,
⎛ 1 ⎞
ψL
⎜ · ⎟
⎟
(10.32)
qL = ⎜
⎝ · ⎠,
Nf
ψL
and similarly for qR (the color index is not written explicitly). Recalling
the relation between the Dirac Lagrangian written in terms of Dirac
spinors and in terms of Weyl spinors, Sections 3.4.1 and 3.4.2, we can
rewrite the quark part of the QCD Lagrangian (10.29) in the form
† µ
† µ
†
†
σ̄ Dµ qL + iqR
σ Dµ qR − (qL
M qR + q R
M qL ) ,
Lquarks = iqL

(10.33)

where M is a mass matrix, diagonal in ﬂavor space
MAB = mA δAB .

(10.34)

If we set the mass term to zero, in the above Lagrangian there is no
coupling between left-handed and right-handed quarks, and we can perform a SU (Nf ) transformation independently on the left-handed and
right-handed quarks,
qL → UL qL ,

qR → UR qR ,

(10.35)

with UL , UR two independent SU (Nf ) matrices acting in ﬂavor space.
The operator Dµ acts on the coordinates, through ∂µ , and in color space,
because of Aaµ T a ; however, it knows nothing about ﬂavor. Therefore, if
the matrices UL,R do not depend on the coordinates xµ , they commute
with Dµ . Then under eq. (10.35)
† µ
† † µ
† †
qL
σ̄ Dµ qL → qL
UL σ̄ Dµ UL qL = qL
UL UL σ̄ µ Dµ qL ,

(10.36)

so it is invariant, since UL† UL = 1, and similarly for qR . This means that,
in the limit in which we can neglect the masses of Nf quark ﬂavors, QCD
has an approximate global SUL (Nf ) × SUR (Nf ) invariance.3
We introduce the Dirac spinor Q, in the chiral representation of the
γ-matrices,


qL
Q=
.
(10.37)
qR
Then the symmetry SUL (Nf ) × SUR (Nf ) can be written as a product
of a vector SU (Nf ) and an axial SU (Nf ), similarly to eq. (10.31)
Q → eiα Q ,

5

Q → eiβγ Q ,

(10.38)

3

Actually, we could more generally consider a UL (Nf ) × UR (Nf ) transformation, so we also have a vector U (1),
which corresponds to baryon number,
and an axial U (1). The axial U (1)
symmetry is however spoiled by subtle
quantum eﬀects that we will not discuss.

250 Non-abelian gauge theories

with α = αa T a and β = β a T a , where T a are the generators of the ﬂavor
symmetry in the fundamental representation.
If the mass term is non-zero, but Nf masses are equal, so that M = mI
is a multiple of the identity matrix, we no longer have a SU (Nf ) ×
SU (Nf ) global symmetry, but we still have a SU (Nf ) global symmetry
in which the left- and right-handed quarks are rotated in the same way,
since in this case the mass term is
†
†
qL )
qR + qR
m(qL

(10.39)

and is invariant under eq. (10.35) with UL = UR .
The approximation of neglecting the quark masses or of neglecting
their diﬀerences is useful only for the lightest quarks, u and d (and, to
a lesser accuracy, s). In particular, if we take mu  md , we have an
approximate SU (2) global symmetry called isospin, while if we further
assume mu  md  ms we have an approximate SU (3) ﬂavor symmetry.
We discussed these symmetries in the Complement on page 209, where
we also explained how to use them to extract information on hadronic
matrix elements. We will further examine the axial SU (Nf ) symmetry
in Section 11.2, when we discuss spontaneous symmetry breaking and
Goldstone bosons.

10.4

Fields in the adjoint representation

We have seen that the form of the covariant derivative depends on
the transformation property of the object on which it acts, since in
eq. (10.18) the generators are in the same representation R as the ﬁeld
Ψ. Apart from ﬁelds transforming in the fundamental representation
of SU (N ), another typical case that one encounters is that of ﬁelds in
the adjoint representation. Let us consider for deﬁniteness a real scalar
ﬁeld. As we saw in Section 2.4, the adjoint representation exists for
any group and has the same dimension as the number of generators,
i.e. N 2 − 1 for SU (N ). A scalar ﬁeld in the adjoint can be written
as φa (x), a = 1, . . . , N 2 − 1 (while for a ﬁeld in the fundamental, as in
the previous section, we use the notation φα with α = 1, . . . , N ), and
the indices a, b are of the same type as the indices labeling the generators. Under a gauge transformation, a ﬁeld in the adjoint of SU (N )
transforms by deﬁnition as


a
a
(10.40)
φ → eigθ (x)Tadj φ ,
where φ is the vector column with components φa . Using the fact that
we have as many ﬁelds as generators, we can form the matrix ﬁeld
Φ(x) = φa (x)T a

(10.41)

(with the generators T a in any representation that we wish to use, not
necessarily in the adjoint). We now show that, in terms of Φ, eq. (10.40)
becomes
(10.42)
Φ(x) → U (x)Φ(x)U † (x) .

10.4

Fields in the adjoint representation 251

Here U (x) = exp{igθ a (x)T a }, where the generators T a are in the same
representation that we used in the deﬁnition of Φ, eq. (10.41).4 To prove
this assertion, it is suﬃcient to consider an inﬁnitesimal transformation.
a bc
) =
The explicit form of the generators in the adjoint of SU (N ) is (Tadj
abc
ab
−if . Writing all indices as upper indices, raised with δ , under an
inﬁnitesimal transformation we have
a cb b
) φ = −gf abcθa φb ,
δφc = igθa (Tadj

4

In other words, eq. (10.42) holds at
the abstract group level, without any
reference to the representation.

(10.43)

which implies that
δΦ = δφc T c = −gf abcθa φb T c .

(10.44)

On the other hand, the inﬁnitesimal form of eq. (10.42) is
δΦ = ig[θa T a , Φ] = igθa φb [T a , T b ] = −gf abc θa φb T c ,

(10.45)

which agrees with eq. (10.44).5 Of course, nothing here depends on the
Lorentz indices of the ﬁeld, so we see that Fµν is an example of a ﬁeld
transforming in the adjoint representation under local gauge transformation; compare with eq. (10.23). Instead Aµ transforms in the adjoint
only under global transformations, while for local transformations it acquires also the inhomogeneous term ∼ ∂µ U . Observe also that if we
choose φa real then Φ is hermitian, and the gauge transformation is
compatible with the hermiticity condition.
The covariant derivative of a ﬁeld in the adjoint is
a

c a b
(Dµ φ) = ∂µ φa − ig Acµ (Tadj
) bφ .

(10.46)

a
Using (Tadj
)bc = −if a bc we have
a

(Dµ φ) = ∂µ φa − gf abc φb Acµ .

(10.47)

By deﬁnition (Dµ φ)a transforms as φa under local gauge transformations. We can also write the covariant derivative in terms of Φ; deﬁning
Dµ Φ = (Dµ φ)α T a , eq. (10.47) gives
Dµ Φ = ∂µ Φ − ig[Aµ , Φ] .

(10.48)

Using eqs. (10.14) and (10.42), we easily check that under gauge transformations
(10.49)
Dµ Φ → U (x)(Dµ Φ)U † (x) ,
conﬁrming that Dµ Φ transforms as Φ. An invariant Lagrangian is
2
1
∂µ φa − gf abc φb Acµ .
(10.50)
2
Here the generators which appear in eq. (10.41) have been chosen in
the fundamental representation, so the trace gives a factor 1/2 and we
recover the standard normalization of the kinetic term. The gauge invariance of eq. (10.50) follows from the cyclicity of the trace. Again, we
see that the requirement of gauge invariance ﬁxes the interaction terms,
and in eq. (10.50) we have a cubic interaction −gf abc (∂µ φa )φb Acµ and a
quartic interaction O(g 2 φ2 A2µ ).
L = Tr Dµ ΦDµ Φ =

5
Actually, to prove eq. (10.42) it was
not really necessary to perform an explicit computation. It suﬃces to realize
that eq. (10.42) is the same transformation law obeyed by the tensor T αβ =
ψα ψ† β where ψ is in the fundamental
representation N and ψ † in the antifundamental N̄ . The product N ⊗ N̄ decomposes into (N 2 − 1) ⊕ 1, i.e. in the
adjoint plus the singlet. However, the
singlet is absent in Φ because Tr T a =0,
and therefore Φ is purely in the adjoint.

252 Non-abelian gauge theories

Summary of chapter
• Non-abelian gauge transformations generalize the local invariance
of electrodynamics, with gauge group U (1), to non-abelian gauge
groups like SU (N ). Instead of a single gauge ﬁeld, we now have a
set of gauge ﬁelds Aaµ , with one gauge ﬁeld for each generator of the
gauge group. Matter ﬁelds are in a representation R of the gauge
group and therefore carry an internal index α = 1, . . . , dim (R).
The transformation laws are given by eqs. (10.10) and (10.14).
• The Yang–Mills Lagrangian is given by eq. (10.28). Besides an
interaction term between matter and gauge ﬁelds, dictated by the
covariant derivative, there are also interaction vertices involving
only three and four gauge bosons, ﬁxed by the form of the nonabelian ﬁeld strength. Therefore all these interaction terms are
ﬁxed by the requirement of gauge invariance.
• QCD is a Yang–Mills theory with gauge group SU (3); the matter
ﬁelds are the quarks and the gauge ﬁelds are the gluons. The
Lagrangian is given in eq. (10.29).

Further reading
• Non-abelian gauge theories are the building blocks
of modern particle physics. Given their extraordinary experimental success and their rich theoretical
structure, the literature on them is vast. A detailed
introduction is provided in Peskin and Schroeder

(1995) and in Weinberg vol. II, (1996).
• A detailed survey of QCD is given by the three
volumes of At the frontier of Particle Physics–
Handbook of QCD, M. Shifman ed., World Scientiﬁc 2001.

Spontaneous symmetry
breaking
In this chapter we present the phenomenon of spontaneous symmetry
breaking (SSB). This is a mechanism of great importance both in particle
physics and in condensed matter physics. Its generality and importance
stem from the fact that it deals with how a symmetry of the action
in QFT (or of the Hamiltonian in a statistical system) is reﬂected on
the ground state of the system. As we will see in Section 11.1, SSB
strictly speaking can only take place in a system with an inﬁnite number of degrees of freedom. It is therefore a genuinely ﬁeld-theoretical
phenomenon, which does not appear in quantum mechanical systems
with a ﬁnite number of variables.
We will examine the eﬀect of SSB on diﬀerent types of symmetries.
In Section 11.2 we will discuss the SSB of global symmetries, and the
emergence of Goldstone bosons. In Section 11.3 we will examine the SSB
of local abelian symmetries, and we will see that it is a crucial element
in the BCS theory of superconductivity, when the latter is formulated
in ﬁeld theoretical language. We will ﬁnally examine the SSB of nonabelian gauge symmetries, and we will see that in this case it gives rise
to the masses of non-abelian gauge bosons, like the W ± and Z 0 in the
Standard Model.

11.1

Degenerate vacua in QM and QFT

Spontaneous symmetry breaking is a very general phenomenon characterized by the fact that the action has a symmetry (global or local) but
the quantum theory, instead of having a unique vacuum state which respects this symmetry, has a family of degenerate vacua that transform
into each other under the action of the symmetry group.
A simple example is given by a ferromagnet. The action governing its
microscopic dynamics is invariant under spatial rotations. For instance,
we can describe a ferromagnet by a generalization of the Ising Hamiltonian given in eq. (9.64), introducing a vector variable si associated to
each site i,

si ·sj ,
(11.1)
H = −J
i,j

where J > 0 and the sum is restricted to nearest-neighbor pairs. As
we discussed in Section 9.5, above a critical temperature a ferromagnet

11
11.1 Degenerate vacua in
QM and QFT

253

11.2 SSB of global symmetries
and Goldstone bosons
256
11.3 Abelian theories: SSB
and superconductivity

259

11.4 Non-abelian theories:
masses of W ± and Z 0

262

254 Spontaneous symmetry breaking

has a unique ground state, with zero magnetization. Of course this
state respects the rotational invariance, since on it the expectation value
of the magnetization M = si vanishes, and therefore no preferred
direction is selected. Below a critical temperature instead it becomes
thermodynamically favorable to develop a non-zero magnetization, and
in this new vacuum M = 0 and the full SO(3) rotational symmetry is
broken to the subgroup SO(2) of rotations around the magnetization
axis.
The original invariance of the Lagrangian is now reﬂected in the fact
that, instead of a single vacuum state, there is a whole family of vacua
related to each other by rotations, since the magnetization can in principle develop in any direction. However, the system will choose one
of these states as its vacuum state. The symmetry is then said to be
spontaneously broken by the choice of a vacuum.
SSB is a phenomenon that cannot take place in a quantum mechanical
system with a ﬁnite number of degrees of freedom, since in this case, if
we have a family of “vacua”, the true vacuum state is a superposition
of them which respects the original symmetry. To illustrate this point,
we consider for instance the quantum mechanics of a particle, described
by a coordinate q(t), in a potential

V

1 2 2
λ (q (t) − η 2 )2 ,
(11.2)
2
with λ, η parameters. This potential is shown in Fig. 11.1, and is called
a double-well potential. The Lagrangian is
V (q) =

−η

η

q

Fig. 11.1 A double-well potential

L=

1 2
mq̇ − V (q) ,
2

(11.3)

and is symmetric under the parity transformation q(t) → −q(t) (this
is also called a Z2 symmetry, where Z2 is the ﬁnite group formed by 1
and −1 under multiplication). The potential has two minima, at q =
±η. We can solve the Schrödinger equation expanding the potential
around the minimum at q = +η, retaining only the quadratic term
in the Taylor expansion of the potential around η (so that we have
a harmonic oscillator), and treating in perturbation theory all higher
powers of the expansion of the potential. We call |+ the ground state
obtained in this way; more precisely, this is a perturbative vacuum. We
can do the same expanding around −η, and we call |− the corresponding
perturbative vacuum. However, the true ground state of the theory
is neither |+ nor |− . At the non-perturbative level there is a nonvanishing amplitude for the transition between these two states, due to
the possibility of tunneling under the barrier which separates the two
minima, and which can be computed in a WKB approximation (or using
the instanton technique developed in Solved Problem 9.1). Because of
the tunneling process, the Hamiltonian is not diagonal in the |± basis.
Rather, we will have
+|H|+ = −|H|− ≡ a
+|H|− = −|H|+ ≡ b ,

(11.4)

11.1

Degenerate vacua in QM and QFT 255

with b
a, since the tunneling amplitude is exponentially suppressed.
Diagonalizing this Hamiltonian we immediately ﬁnd that the eigenstates
are the symmetric and antisymmetric combinations
|S = |+ + |− ,

|A = |+ − |− ,

(11.5)

with energies a±b, respectively. Therefore the degeneracy between these
states is lifted by the fact that b = 0, and the true ground state is the
combination with energy a − |b|.
Under a parity transformation q → −q, |S is invariant while |A picks
a minus sign. Recalling that physical states are deﬁned up to an overall
phase, we see that the true ground state of the Hamiltonian goes into
itself under parity, and there is no SSB of the Z2 symmetry.
Consider now a real scalar ﬁeld with Lagrangian
1
L = ∂ µ φ∂µ φ − λ2 (φ2 − η 2 )2 .
2

(11.6)

Here again we have a Z2 symmetry φ → −φ. The crucial diﬀerence is
that the tunneling amplitude in this case is proportional to exp{−cV }
with c a constant and V the spatial volume. In fact, this tunneling
amplitude can be evaluated as in the instanton computation that we have
discussed in Solved Problem 9.1, with a classical conﬁguration which
is not localized in space, so its action is proportional to the volume,
Scl = cV , and the tunneling amplitude is proportional to exp{−Scl} =
exp{−cV }. This result can be understood physically by discretizing
space, so that our ﬁeld theory corresponds to a quantum mechanical
system in which for each spatial point x we have a variable qx (t) ≡
φ(x, t), and in order to tunnel into the other vacuum each of the qx
must tunnel. Let the tunneling amplitude for a single variable qx be

proportional to e−c , for some constant c . The total amplitude is the
product of the separate amplitudes so, if N is the number of lattice sites,



e−c = e−c N = e−cV .
(11.7)
tunneling amplitude ∼
x

In an inﬁnite volume this amplitude vanishes and there is no mixing
between the two vacua. In other words, the eﬀective height of the barrier
is inﬁnite and therefore we truly have two distinct sectors of the theory,
i.e. two diﬀerent Hilbert spaces H+ , H− constructed above the two
vacua |± with the usual rules of second quantization. There is no
possibility to restore the symmetry via tunneling, and all local operators
have vanishing matrix elements between a state in H+ and a state in
H− .
A characteristic of SSB is the existence of an order parameter which
takes a non-zero expectation value on the chosen vacuum. In the example of the ferromagnet the order parameter is the magnetization, i.e. a
spatial vector, while in the previous example it was an element of Z2 ,
φ /η = ±1. In the following we will be interested in situations where
the order parameter is a scalar ﬁeld φ, real or complex. In any case, the
order parameter is a quantity which is not invariant under the symmetry

256 Spontaneous symmetry breaking

1

More precisely, since vectors that differ by a phase describe the same physical state, we do not have SSB if U |0 =
eiα |0, for some constant phase α. Conversely, in order to have SSB, beside
eq. (11.8) we must also require that
T a |0 is not proportional to |0 itself.

in question, so that a non-vanishing expectation value means that the
symmetry is broken.
For a Lie group, we can restate the condition of SSB in terms of
the action of the generators on the vacuum state. We denote by U =
exp{iθa T a } a generic element of the symmetry group in question, and by
T a the generators. If the vacuum state is invariant, then for any value of
the parameters θ a we have U |0 = |0 and therefore all generators must
annihilate the vacuum,1 so T a |0 = 0 for each a. Instead, if the vacuum
state is not invariant, there must be one or more generators T a that do
not give zero when acting on the vacuum state,
T a |0 = 0 .

(11.8)

For example, for a ferromagnet in the ordered phase the SO(3) rotation
group is broken. The SO(3) generators are the angular momentum
operators Jx , Jy , Jz and if the magnetization is, say, along the z-axis, we
have Jz |0 = 0 (since rotations around the z-axis still leave the vacuum
state invariant) but Jx |0 = 0, Jy |0 = 0. The full SO(3) group is
therefore broken to the SO(2) subgroup generated by Jz .

11.2

SSB of global symmetries and
Goldstone bosons

Consider the Lagrangian for a complex scalar ﬁeld
L = ∂µ φ∗ ∂ µ φ − V (|φ|) ,

(11.9)

with

2
1 2 2
λ |φ| − η 2 .
(11.10)
2
This is a double-well potential for |φ| and therefore it has a continuous set
of minima; writing φ = |φ|eiα , the vacua are characterized by |φ| = η,
and α arbitrary. The Lagrangian has a global U (1) invariance
V (|φ|) =

φ → eiθ φ ,

(11.11)

with θ an arbitrary constant. The scalar ﬁeld will choose one of these
vacua, so that α = α0 , and the U (1) symmetry is spontaneously broken. Without loss of generality we can redeﬁne α so that α0 = 0, and
therefore on the vacuum
φ = η .
(11.12)
We want to understand the spectrum of the theory after SSB. This can
be done studying the small oscillations around the vacuum. We therefore
write
1
(11.13)
φ(x) = η + √ (χ(x) + iψ(x))
2
√
where χ and ψ are real ﬁelds (the normalization 1/ 2 is chosen for later
convenience). Observe that the set of vacua is a circle of radius η in

11.2

SSB of global symmetries and Goldstone bosons 257

the complex ﬁeld plane, and since we are expanding around the point
(Re φ = η, Im φ = 0), χ is a ﬂuctuation in the direction orthogonal to the
manifold of vacua, while ψ is a ﬂuctuation in the tangential direction,
as shown in Fig. 11.2.
In other words, η + iψ, for ψ constant and
inﬁnitesimal, is another vacuum. A small displacement in the direction
of ψ does not cost energy since we are moving along a ﬂat direction of
the potential (at least to lowest order, i.e. retaining terms quadratic in ψ
in the Lagrangian and neglecting cubic and higher-order terms). Instead
with a small displacement in the direction of χ we feel an approximately
quadratic rise of the potential, so this ﬂuctuation costs energy. It is
therefore clear that, after quantization, ψ is associated to a massless
mode, while χ is a massive mode. To check this formally, we insert
eq. (11.13) into the Lagrangian (11.9), and we ﬁnd
2
1
1
λ2  √
L = ∂µ χ∂ µ χ + ∂µ ψ∂ µ ψ −
(2 2η) χ + χ2 + ψ 2 . (11.14)
2
2
8

V

χ
Re φ
Im φ

ψ

Fig. 11.2 The directions in ﬁeld
space parametrized by χ and ψ.

We see indeed that in this Lagrangian there is a mass term for χ,
1 2
λ2 √ 2
mχ =
(2 2η) = λ2 η 2 ,
2
8

(11.15)

but there is no term of the form (1/2)m2ψ ψ 2 , so ψ is massless. In conclusion, in this model the U (1) symmetry (11.11) is spontaneously broken
by the choice of vacuum, and at the same time a massless spin-0 boson
appears in the spectrum.2
This is an example of a general theorem, the Goldstone theorem, which
states that, given a ﬁeld theory which is Lorentz invariant, local, and
has a Hilbert space with a positive deﬁnite scalar product, if a continuous global symmetry is spontaneously broken, then in the expansion
around the symmetry-breaking vacuum there appears a massless particle for each generator that breaks the symmetry. This particle is called
a Goldstone (or Nambu–Goldstone) particle.
As in the above example, also in the general case the emergence of
massless particles corresponds to the possibility of moving, in ﬁeld space,
in the direction of the manifold of vacua. The dimensionality of the
manifold of vacua is equal to the number of generators which break the
symmetry. In fact, setting the vacuum energy to zero, by deﬁnition we
have H|0 = 0. Since T a is the generator of a symmetry transformation,
it satisﬁes [T a , H] = 0 and therefore
H(T a |0 ) = T a H|0 = 0 .

(11.16)

So, if T a |0 = 0 (and if it is not proportional to |0 itself, see note 1) we
have found a new state with the minimum energy, i.e. another vacuum
state. This is the origin of the fact that we have a Goldstone particle
for each generator which breaks the symmetry.
The Goldstone theorem further states that the quantum numbers of
the Goldstone particles are the same as the corresponding generator. In
most cases, the global symmetry transformations are internal transformations in the ﬁeld space which do not act on the Lorentz indices of

2

Our discussion is oversimpliﬁed, because we assumed that the relevant
quantity, for determining whether the
vacuum is degenerate, is the classical potential V (φ). Quantum corrections in general can modify the form
of the potential, and generate an eﬀective potential (known as the Coleman–
Weinberg eﬀective potential), which
is the quantity that really determines
whether there is SSB or not. However,
replacing V (φ) with this eﬀective potential, our considerations are correct.

258 Spontaneous symmetry breaking

3

However, in supersymmetry the generators exchange fermions with bosons
and carry half integer spin. As a consequence, the Goldstone particles associated to global supersymmetry breaking
are fermions.

the ﬁelds. For instance, in the above example the symmetry which is
broken is U (1), or, equivalently, an O(2) rotation symmetry in the space
(Re φ, Im φ). These rotations do not touch Lorentz indices, and therefore the generators are Lorentz scalars. Correspondingly, the associated
massless particle is a spin-0 boson.3
In particle physics, an important example of Goldstone bosons is provided by the pions. From the discussion in Section 10.3 we know that,
in the limit in which the masses of the up and down quarks can be
neglected, QCD has an approximate global SU (2) × SU (2) symmetry.
We can now ask how it is realized on the vacuum. If the vacuum is invariant, then the situation is completely analogous to ordinary quantum
mechanics, and the spectrum of the system is organized in multiplets
(degenerate in mass) of the symmetry group. On the contrary, if a
generator fails to annihilate the vacuum, we have seen that there is a
corresponding massless particle in the spectrum.
Therefore, if the SU (2)×SU (2) approximate global symmetry of QCD
were unbroken, all strongly interacting particles should be approximately
arranged in representations of SU (2) × SU (2). Since the two SU (2)
factors are obtained one from the other with a parity transformation,
this means in particular that for each strongly interacting particle there
should be a second one, approximately degenerate in mass, and with the
opposite parity. Experimentally this is not the case. For instance, the
three pions are pseudoscalars, and there exists no triplet of real scalars
close in mass to the pions.
Rather, the experimental values of masses and quantum numbers of
the strongly interacting particles point toward a diﬀerent alternative:
the vector SU (2) is unbroken, and is in fact the isospin symmetry. Correspondingly, particles are organized in isospin multiplets almost degenerate in mass; the three pions form a triplet, the proton and neutron a
doublet, etc. This explains why their mass diﬀerences, which are O(1)
MeV, are tiny compared to the strong interaction scale which is rather
O(100) MeV.
On the contrary the axial SU (2) is spontaneously broken, and as a
consequence we have three (because of the three generators of SU (2))
Goldstone bosons, which are pseudoscalar because of the γ 5 in the generators of the axial SU (2) transformation, see eq. (10.38). More precisely,
one uses the term quasi-Goldstone bosons to stress that these are particles which would be massless in the limit of exact symmetry; since
instead this SU (2) × SU (2) symmetry is only approximate, these particles are light compared to the other hadrons. Indeed, the three pions
fulﬁll these conditions. They are pseudoscalars, and they are the lightest
strongly interacting particles, with masses O(140) MeV rather than the
values O(1) GeV typical of the neutron and the proton.
Identifying the pions as the pseudo-Goldstone bosons of chiral symmetry allows us to write down eﬀective Lagrangians which govern their
dynamics, burying all our ignorance of QCD at large distances into a
few phenomenological parameters. This is a more advanced subject, and
we refer the reader to the Further Reading section.

11.3

11.3

Abelian gauge theories: SSB and superconductivity 259

Abelian gauge theories: SSB and
superconductivity

To illustrate the eﬀect of SSB on a theory with a local symmetry we start
again from the Lagrangian (11.9), but now we gauge the U (1) symmetry.
Therefore we introduce a U (1) gauge ﬁeld Aµ and we take as Lagrangian
1
L = (Dµ φ)∗ Dµ φ − V (|φ|) − Fµν F µν ,
4

(11.17)

Dµ φ = (∂µ + iqAµ ) φ .

(11.18)

with
As before,

2
1 2 2
λ |φ| − η 2 .
(11.19)
2
To understand the physical content of the theory, it is convenient to
write the complex ﬁeld φ in terms of its modulus and a phase, and to
expand the modulus around η,4


1
iα(x)
φ(x) = |φ(x)| e
= η + √ ϕ(x) eiα(x) .
(11.20)
2
V (|φ|) =

Now observe that, since under the U (1) local transformation φ transforms as
(11.21)
φ(x) → eiqθ(x) φ(x)
with θ(x) the parameter of the gauge transformation, we can ﬁx the
gauge freedom setting α(x) = 0 in eq. (11.20). In other words, we
have used the gauge freedom to remove one degree of freedom from the
complex ﬁeld φ, so that we are left with just a single real scalar ﬁeld ϕ.
The phase α(x) parametrizes the manifold of vacua, so it is the ﬁeld that,
in the case of global symmetries, describes the Goldstone boson.5 We see
that when we break a local symmetry the Goldstone boson is eliminated
from the physical spectrum by gauge invariance. After setting α(x) = 0,
using eqs. (11.18) and (11.20) we get


1
1
Dµ φ = √ (∂µ ϕ) + iq η + √ ϕ Aµ
(11.22)
2
2
and, substituting into eq. (11.17),

√
η 2 3 1 4
1 µ
2
ϕ + ϕ
L = ∂ ϕ∂µ ϕ − λ η 2 ϕ2 +
2
2
8
2

1
1
Aµ Aµ − Fµν F µν .
+q 2 η + √ ϕ
4
2

(11.23)

We recognize a standard kinetic term for a real massive scalar ﬁeld ϕ,
with mass m2ϕ = 2λ2 η 2 . For the gauge ﬁeld, the quadratic term is now
1
1
LA = − Fµν F µν + m2A Aµ Aµ ,
4
2

(11.24)

4

Polar coordinates become singular at
the origin, therefore this parametrization is only useful when ϕ  η. However, to understand the particle content of the theory it is suﬃcient to limit
ourselves to ϕ inﬁnitesimal and therefore, as long as η = 0, we can use this
parametrization without problems.

5

In fact, α parametrizes exactly the direction in ﬁeld space corresponding to
the vacuum manifold, while the ﬁeld
ψ in the previous section parametrizes
this direction only for inﬁnitesimal displacements.

260 Spontaneous symmetry breaking

with
m2A = 2q 2 η 2 .

(11.25)

Taking the variation of eq. (11.24) we ﬁnd the equation of motion
∂µ F µν + m2A Aν = 0 .

(11.26)

Equation (11.26) is known as the Proca equation (we already met it in
Exercise 4.4). Contracting it with ∂ν we have ∂µ ∂ν F µν + m2A ∂ν Aν = 0;
since ∂µ ∂ν F µν = 0 automatically, and mA = 0, we ﬁnd
∂ν Aν = 0 .

(11.27)

Using this condition, ∂µ F µν = ∂µ (∂ µ Aν − ∂ ν Aµ ) becomes equal to 2Aν
and eq. (11.26) gives
(2 + m2A )Aν = 0 .
(11.28)
Therefore the Proca equation describes a massive gauge boson.
We saw in Section 2.4.1 that a vector ﬁeld Aµ , from the point of view
of spatial rotations, decomposes into 0 ⊕ 1. Expanding Aµ (x) in plane
waves, the condition ∂µ Aµ = 0 becomes kµ µ (k) = 0 and eliminates, in a
covariant way, the component with polarization vector µ (k) ∼ kµ , since
for this polarization we have kµ µ (k) ∼ k 2 = m2A = 0. In the rest frame
of the particle (which exists, since mA = 0), k µ = mA (1, 0, 0, 0) and
the polarization vector which has been eliminated is µ (k) = (1, 0, 0, 0)
which, from the point of view of spatial rotations, is a scalar. Therefore
eq. (11.27) eliminates the spin-0 part and we are left with a pure spin 1.
In conclusion, eq. (11.26) describe a massive spin-1 particle.
From this example we learn that the spontaneous breaking of a local
symmetry does not produce Goldstone bosons, but instead the gauge
ﬁeld has acquired a mass proportional to the vacuum expectation value
of the scalar ﬁeld. In this context the scalar ﬁeld φ is called a Higgs
ﬁeld, and the mechanism that produces a mass for the gauge boson is
called the Higgs mechanism. It is interesting to compare the number
of degrees of freedom with and without SSB. If in the potential we set
η = 0, then there is no SSB; the scalar ﬁeld has two real components.
We cannot use the gauge invariance to eliminate the phase θ as before,
because when η = 0 the decomposition (11.20) of φ in
√ terms of two real
ﬁelds ϕ, θ is not well deﬁned: in fact in this case ϕ = 2|φ| and therefore
ϕ  0, so it is no longer a scalar ﬁeld which can freely perform at least
inﬁnitesimal ﬂuctuations around ϕ = 0. Rather, gauge invariance can
be used to eliminate the longitudinal components of Aµ , as we studied
when we quantized the free electromagnetic ﬁeld in Section 4.3.2, and
the remaining gauge ﬁeld has two physical degrees of freedom, the two
transverse polarizations. In total we have two physical degrees of freedom from the Higgs ﬁeld and two from the gauge ﬁeld. After SSB, the
scalar ﬁeld has just one real component, but the gauge ﬁeld is massive,
and a massive spin-1 particle has three degrees of freedom. In total,
we have 1 + 3 = 4 degrees of freedom. So, the Higgs mechanism implies a reshuﬄing of the degrees of freedom. The ﬁeld that, in the case

11.3

Abelian gauge theories: SSB and superconductivity 261

of a global symmetry, was a Goldstone boson, is turned into the third
polarization state of a massive spin-1 particle.
One might ask what do we really gain by giving a mass to the gauge
boson with the Higgs mechanism, rather than adding by hand a mass
term (1/2)m2A Aµ Aµ to the Lagrangian (a mass term for the gauge ﬁeld
generated by SSB is called a soft mass term, in contrast to a term added
by hand, which is called a hard mass term). The point is that, in the
Higgs mechanism, the Lagrangian is gauge invariant, which is not the
case if we instead add by hand a mass term. The breaking of the symmetry takes place at the level of the vacuum. It can be shown that
such a spontaneous breaking preserves a number of good properties of
the unbroken theory, and in particular the theory is still renormalizable.
Intuitively, this comes from the fact that at very high energies E
η
we can neglect η and the UV properties of the theory are the same as
in the case η = 0. If we instead break the gauge symmetry by hand the
theory is not renormalizable.
Spontaneous breaking of the U (1) gauge symmetry is realized in Nature in the phenomenon of superconductivity. Let us recall that the
relation between the electric current j and an applied external electric
ﬁeld E is j = σE, where the proportionality constant σ is called the
conductivity. A superconductor is an object where σ = ∞. In a piece
of material with ﬁnite volume we have a ﬁnite number of electrons, so
we cannot have an inﬁnite current, and therefore the electric ﬁeld E is
forced to be zero inside the superconductor, and the Maxwell equation
Ḃ = −∇ × E states that the magnetic ﬁeld B is constant in time. Therefore, if B was zero at some initial time, it will remain zero inside the
superconductor even if we switch on an external magnetic ﬁeld outside
the superconductor. This means the ﬁeld lines of the applied external
magnetic ﬁeld cannot penetrate inside the superconductor (Meissner effect). At the microscopic level, what happens is that the electrons in the
superconductor form currents on the surface, which screen the external
ﬁeld.6 There is therefore a characteristic screening length l, and inside
the superconductor the external magnetic ﬁeld drops exponentially,
B(x) = B(0)e−x/l ,

(11.29)

where x = 0 represents the interface between the superconductor (at
x > 0) and the external space. The physical mechanism behind superconductivity is that, due basically to an interaction mediated by
phonons, pairs of electrons bind together in a singlet state, forming the
so-called Cooper pairs. This composite object is therefore described,
at the level of eﬀective theory, by a charged scalar ﬁeld, with charge
equal to twice the electron charge. The eﬀective Lagrangian describing
the interaction of this scalar ﬁeld with the electromagnetic ﬁeld is given
by eq. (11.17) (with q = 2e). The result (11.29) is then understood in
terms of the Higgs mechanism: the scalar ﬁeld describing the Cooper
pair plays the role of the Higgs ﬁeld and develops a vacuum expectation
value; as a consequence, the photon acquires a mass µ, and its wave
equation becomes eq. (11.28). Then also the electric and magnetic ﬁelds

6
Since a given piece of superconducting material, with a ﬁnite volume, has
only a ﬁnite number of electrons, there
is a maximum magnetic ﬁeld Bc that
can be screened. If the applied external ﬁeld is higher than Bc , it turns
out that the ﬁeld penetrates in a nonhomogeneous manner. For type II superconductors, the magnetic ﬁeld penetrates in the form of narrow ﬂux tubes.

262 Spontaneous symmetry breaking

satisfy a massive KG,
(2 + µ2 ) E = 0 ,

(2 + µ2 ) B = 0 .

(11.30)

When we switch on an external magnetic ﬁeld, after a transient time
we will have a static ﬁeld conﬁguration. Therefore the equation for B
becomes ∇2 B = 0 at x < 0 and (∇2 − µ2 )B = 0 at x > 0. The solution
of this equation, at x > 0, is given by (11.29) with l identiﬁed with
µ−1 . The penetration length is therefore the inverse of the mass that
the photon has inside a superconductor.

11.4

Non-abelian gauge theories: the
masses of W ± and Z 0

We consider now an SU (2) gauge theory with a doublet of complex scalar
ﬁelds φα , with α = 1, 2, transforming in the fundamental representation.
We call φ the Higgs ﬁeld. The covariant derivative is
α

(Dµ φ) = ∂µ φα − igAaµ (T a )α β φβ ,

(11.31)

and the generators T a in the fundamental representation, for SU (2), are
T a = σ a /2, where σ a are the Pauli matrices.
Since φ† φ is invariant under φ → U φ with U unitary, any function of
†
φ φ is gauge invariant, and we can also write a gauge-invariant potential
term V (φ† φ). Therefore the Lagrangian is
1 a a µν
F
,
LSU(2)−Higgs = (Dµ φ)† (Dµ φ) − V (φ† φ) − Fµν
4

(11.32)

and we choose

2
1 2 †
λ φ φ − η2 .
(11.33)
2
We have a degenerate family of vacua, at φ† φ = η 2 . Following the same
strategy used for the SSB of the U (1) gauge invariance, we use the gauge
freedom to eliminate some components of φ (similarly to the elimination
of α(x) in the previous section). Here we have a ﬁeld φ with two complex
components, i.e. four real components, and an SU (2) transformation,
which has three parameters. We can then use the gauge freedom to
eliminate three of the four components of φ, writing it as


0
,
(11.34)
φ=
η + √12 χ
V (φ† φ) =

where χ is a real scalar ﬁeld. It is convenient to introduce the matrices


 √
1  1
0 1
+
2
(11.35)
σ = √ σ + iσ = 2
0 0
2


 √
1 
0 0
σ − = √ σ 1 − iσ 2 = 2
(11.36)
1 0
2

11.4

and the ﬁelds

Non-abelian gauge theories: the masses of W ± and Z 0 263


1  1
A±
Aµ ± iA2µ
µ = √
2

(11.37)

− +
3 3
σ a Aaµ = σ + A−
µ + σ Aµ + σ Aµ .

(11.38)

so that
Then, the covariant derivative becomes
 √ − 


0
χ
g
2Aµ
.
Dµ φ =
− i (η + √ )
3
√1 ∂µ χ
−A
2
2
µ
2

(11.39)

∗
+
Recalling from the deﬁnition (11.37) that (A−
µ ) = Aµ , we ﬁnd


2
g2
1 µ
χ
A3 µ A3µ
(D φ) (Dµ φ) = ∂ χ∂µ χ +
η+ √
2
4
2
2

g2
χ
−µ
A+
.
+
η+ √
µA
2
2
µ

†

(11.40)

Apart from the standard kinetic term of the χ ﬁeld and from cubic and
quartic couplings between χ and the gauge ﬁelds, we recognize a mass
term for A3µ ,
g2
1 2
mA = η 2
(11.41)
2
4
and, using
1
−µ
A+
= (A1µ A1 µ + A2µ A2 µ ) ,
(11.42)
µA
2
−µ
we see that the term (g 2 /2)η 2 A+
gives the same mass mA to both
µA
1
2
Aµ and Aµ or, equivalently, to their linear combinations A±
µ . Therefore
all three gauge bosons become massive, with a mass

gη
mA = √ .
2

(11.43)

In the Standard Model the situation is similar, but the gauge group
now is SU (2) × U (1). We have three gauge bosons Aaµ associated with
SU (2) and one gauge boson Bµ associated to U (1), and two diﬀerent
gauge couplings, g for SU (2) and g  for U (1). This means that on a ﬁeld
in a generic representation the covariant derivative is
Dµ = ∂µ − ig T a Aaµ − ig  SBµ

(11.44)

where T a are the SU (2) generators in the representation of interest, and
S is the charge of the particle in question relative to the U (1) group, i.e
the parameter that labels the U (1) representation.
The Higgs boson φ is an SU (2) doublet (so that on it T a = σ a /2) and
is given the assignment S = 1/2.7 Therefore


σa
g
Dµ φ = ∂µ − ig Aaµ − i Bµ φ .
(11.45)
2
2

7
Note that both components of the
doublet have the same assignment of
S. In general, on any SU (2) multiplet,
S is a constant times the unit matrix,
which means that S commutes with the
SU (2) generators, as it should be, since
the gauge group is the direct product of
SU (2) and U (1).

264 Spontaneous symmetry breaking

The potential for the Higgs ﬁeld is the same as in eq. (11.33) so that
again we can choose a gauge such that


0
φ=
.
(11.46)
1
η+ √ χ
2

Computing (D µ φ)† Dµ φ using eq. (11.45) we ﬁnd terms quadratic in the
gauge ﬁelds, of the form
1 2
1
−µ
η (gA3µ − g  Bµ )(gA3 µ − g  B µ ) + g 2 η 2 A+
.
µA
4
2
It is convenient to introduce the notation

ḡ = g 2 + g 2 ,
g/ḡ = cos θW ,
g  /ḡ = sin θW

(11.47)

(11.48)

where θW is the Weinberg angle. We also change notation, Wµ± = A±
µ,
and we deﬁne
(11.49)
Zµ0 ≡ A3µ cos θW − Bµ sin θW .
Then we see from eq. (11.47) that the Z boson gets a mass
1
mZ = √ ḡη
2

(11.50)

while the W -bosons get a mass
1
mW = √ gη .
2

(11.51)

The ratio of the W to Z mass is therefore given in terms of the Weinberg
angle,
mW
= cos θW .
(11.52)
mZ
Instead, the other orthogonal combination of A3µ and Bµ ,
Aµ ≡ A3µ sin θW + Bµ cos θW

(11.53)

remains massless and is therefore identiﬁed with the photon.

Summary of chapter
• SSB takes place when, rather than a single vacuum invariant under
the symmetry in question, we have a family of vacua which transform among themselves under the action of the symmetry group.
The system will eventually settle into one of these vacua, and the
symmetry is spontaneously broken by this choice.
• If we have a quantum system with a ﬁnite number of degrees of
freedom there is in general an exponentially small, but nevertheless
ﬁnite, amplitude for tunneling between the diﬀerent perturbative
vacua. The true vacuum will be a superposition of the perturbative
vacua which respects the symmetry, and therefore there is no SSB.
However, in a system with an inﬁnite number of degrees of freedom,
as in QFT, the tunneling amplitude is zero because each degree of
freedom should tunnel, and therefore SSB is possible.

11.4

Non-abelian gauge theories: the masses of W ± and Z 0 265

• When a global symmetry is spontaneously broken, in the spectrum
of the theory there is a massless particle for each broken symmetry generators. In particular, the pions are the Goldstone bosons
associated to the SSB of the axial SU (2) symmetry of QCD. They
would be exactly massless if the symmetry were exact. Since it is
only approximate, they are just lighter than the other hadrons.
• When a local symmetry is spontaneously broken, the gauge ﬁeld
becomes massive and the would-be Goldstone boson is turned into
the third physical degree of freedom of the massive spin-1 gauge
ﬁeld. This mechanism gives an eﬀective mass to the photon in a
superconductor (which is at the origin of the Meissner eﬀect) and
gives a mass to the gauge bosons W ± and Z 0 of the electroweak
theory.

Further reading
• For spontaneous symmetry breaking in gauge theories, a clear discussion is given for instance in Okun
(1982), Chapter 20 and in Coleman (1985), Chapter 5.
• An advanced discussion of SSB can be found in

(Weinberg), vol II, Chapters 19 and 21.
• For a discussion of pion dynamics and chiral Lagrangians see Georgi (1984), Chapter 5, Coleman
(1985), Chapter 2 and (Weinberg), vol II, Chapter 19.

12

Solutions to exercises

12.1 Chapter 1

266

12.2 Chapter 2

267

12.3 Chapter 3

270

12.4 Chapter 4

272

12.5 Chapter 5

275

12.6 Chapter 6

276

12.7 Chapter 7

279

12.8 Chapter 8

281

12.1

Chapter 1

(1.1) Since photons are massless the only energy scale is provided by
kB T . Dimensionally, in units  = c = 1, an energy density
is (mass)4 , therefore the photon density must be ργ ∼ (kB T )4 .
This gives ργ in units (eV)4 . Transforming to GeV/cm3 using
200 MeV fm  1 gives ργ /ρc ∼ 5 × 10−5 . At the present epoch
of the Universe the energy density in photons, or more generally
in relativistic particles, is much smaller than in non-relativistic
matter.
(1.2) A temperature T  4.5 × 106 K corresponds to an energy kB T 
388 eV (using kB T  1/38.68 eV at T = 300 K). For a relativistic particle at the equilibrium temperature T , the average energy is E  3kB T and therefore the average photon energy is
Eγ = O(1) keV. Since Eγ
me
mp , we can use the Thompson
formula (1.16) for the scattering on electrons and the same formula,
with me replaced by mp , for the scattering on protons. Therefore
σ(γp → γp)  8πα2 /(3m2p ). This is smaller than the γe → γe
cross-section by a factor m2e /m2p and therefore the contribution of
the protons to l is negligible. Because of electric charge neutrality,
in our simpliﬁed model of the Sun the electron number density is
equal to the proton number density and is n = ρ/(me + mp ) 
ρ/mp  0.8 × 1024 cm−3 . Inserting the numerical value for the
Thompson cross-section, σ(γe → γe)  6.65 × 10−25 cm2 , we ﬁnd
l  1.8 cm. More accurate modeling of the Sun gives l  0.5 cm.
The photons therefore perform a random walk of step l inside the
Sun. For a random walk in one dimension, after N steps we have
x2 = N l2 . In three dimensions a radial distance R is covered
2
= (1/3)N l 2 because, if we denote by x the
in N steps with R
axis along which the photon ﬁnally escaped, not all steps have been
performed along the x direction. Rather in each step x2 + y 2 + z 2
increases by l 2 , so x2 eﬀectively performs a random walk of step
2
l2 /3. Therefore we get an escape time t = N l/c = 3R
/(lc) 
3 × 104 yr.
(1.3) For slow particles the largest length-scale is the De Broglie wavelength λ = 1/(mv). For the neutron m ∼ 939.56 MeV, so E =
(1/2)mv 2 ∼ 1 MeV gives v ∼ 0.046, λ ∼ 4.5 fm and σ ∼ πλ2 ∼ 0.7
barn.

12.2

12.2

Chapter 2

(2.1) In the rest frame of the particle, E = m and p = 0. Performing
a boost along a direction, say the x-axis, E and p ≡ px transform
as t and x in eq. (2.18), so after the boost E = m cosh η and
p = m sinh η, and therefore (E + p)/(E − p) = e2η .
Performing a further boost with rapidity η  in the same direction,
E → E cosh η  + p sinh η  and p → E sinh η  + p cosh η  , so
(E cosh η  + p sinh η  ) + (E sinh η  + p cosh η  )
(E cosh η  + p sinh η  ) − (E sinh η  + p cosh η  )
 E + p

= e2η+2η .
= e2η
(12.1)
E−p

e2η →

(2.2) A generic tensor T i1 ...iN without any symmetry properties, from
the point of view of angular momenta is the direct product of N
times the vector representation, T i1 ...iN = 1 ⊗ 1 ⊗ . . . ⊗ 1, so it
contains spin up to j = N . Decomposing T i1 ...iN in irreducible
representations, we must remove the traces and each pair of indices must be symmetrized or antisymmetrized. When we remove
a trace two indices are contracted and we are left with a tensor
with two less indices, which can have only up to spin N − 2. When
we antisymmetrize over two indices (i, j) we can then contract
with ijk , so we obtain a tensor with one less index, and maximum
spin N − 1. Therefore the spin N in T i1 ...iN can be neither in the
traces nor in the tensors in which some indices have been antisymmetrized, and must be in the totally symmetric and traceless
tensor.
Typical examples are for instance the quadrupole moment of a
mass distribution ρ(x) (or of a charge distribution),

1
ij
Q = d3 x ρ(x)(xi xj − δ ij x2 ) .
(12.2)
3
which is a spin-2 operator. A spin-3 operator is the octupole moment,

1  ij llk
δ M + δ ik M ljl + δ jk M ill ,
(12.3)
Oijk = M ijk −
5
where the index l is summed over and

ijk
M
= d3 x ρ(x)xi xj xk .
(12.4)
†
† i
(2.3) Let v 0 = ξR
ψR and v i = ξR
σ ψR . We verify that under boosts
0
i
v and v transform as appropriate for a contravariant four-vector.
We can always take the x-axis as the boost direction, and it is also
suﬃcient to consider an inﬁnitesimal boost. Using eq. (2.60),
†
† ησ
†
† 1
ψR → ξR
e ψR  ξR
ψR + η ξR
σ ψR ,
ξR
1

† 1
† ησ
†
† 1
σ ψR → ξR
e σ 1 ψR  η ξR
ψR + ξR
σ ψR .
ξR
1

(12.5)

Chapter 2 267

268 Solutions to exercises

Therefore v 0 → v 0 + ηv 1 and v 1 → ηv 0 + v 1 , which is the inﬁnites† µ
imal form of eq. (2.18). Observe that instead v̄ µ ≡ ξR
σ̄ ψR is not
a contravariant four-vector since, under the transformation (2.18),
v̄ 0 → v̄ 0 − ηv̄ 1 and v̄ 1 → −ηv̄ 0 + v̄ 1 , i.e. they mix with −η rather
than +η. For the left-handed spinors the transformation matrix
is exp{−η σ 1 /2} instead of exp{+η σ 1 /2}, and the situation is re† µ
† µ
versed: ξL
σ̄ ψL is a contravariant four-vector while ξL
σ ψL is not.
We can also verify directly the transformation properties under
ﬁnite Lorentz transformation, using the identity
1

eησ = cosh η + σ 1 sinh η ,

(12.6)

which can be proved performing the Taylor expansion of the exponential and using the fact that (σ 1 )2 = 1.
(2.4) F µν → Λµ ρ Λν σ F ρσ , where Λµ ρ = exp{−(i/2)ωαβ (J αβ )µ ρ } and
(J αβ )µ ρ is given by eq. (2.23), since the tensor representations are
obtained iterating on each index the transformation matrix of the
four-vector representation. Expanding to ﬁrst order in ωαβ and
performing the contractions,
δF µν = ω µ ρ F ρν − ω ν ρ F ρµ .

(12.7)

In terms of E and B,
δE = −η×B + θ×E ,
δB = +η×E + θ×B .

(12.8)

(2.5) (i) Writing explicitly the six conditions Aµν = (1/2)µνρσ Aρσ we
ﬁnd A01 = A23 , A02 = −A13 , A03 = A12 , A12 = A03 , A13 = −A02
and A23 = A01 . With the Minkowski metric, the ﬁrst condition
A01 = A23 becomes A01 = A23 while the last conditions A23 = A01
becomes A23 = −A01 , and together they give A01 = A23 = 0.
Similarly for the other conditions, so in the Minkowski case we are
left with Aµν = 0.
(ii) If instead we raise the indices with δ µν the conditions A01 =
A23 and A23 = A01 are identical, so in total we have only three
independent conditions A01 = A23 , A02 = −A13 and A03 = A12 .
Similarly an anti-self-dual tensor satisﬁes A01 = −A23 , A02 = A13
and A03 = −A12 .
For SO(4), µνρσ is an invariant tensor (as for SO(3, 1), it follows from the condition det Λ = 1). Therefore, if the condition
Aµν = (1/2)µνρσ Aρσ holds in a frame, it holds in all Lorentztransformed frames, so a self-dual tensor remains self-dual, and an
anti-self-dual tensor remains anti-self-dual. This means that selfdual and anti-self-dual tensors are irreducible representations of
SO(4), and that in Euclidean space a six-dimensional real antisymmetric tensor Aµν decomposes into its self-dual and anti-self-dual
parts.

12.2

(iii) With the Minkowski metric the conditions A01 = iA23 and
A23 = iA01 become A01 = iA23 and A23 = −iA01 and therefore are
identical, and similarly for the other conditions, so we are left with
three independent conditions, A01 = iA23 , A02 = −iA13 , A03 =
iA12 . The duality conditions are Lorentz-invariant so self-dual and
anti-self-dual tensors are irreducible representations of SO(3, 1).
However, the Minkowskian duality conditions make sense only if
Aµν is complex, so it can be used only to decompose a tensor
Aµν with six independent complex components into its self-dual
and anti-self-dual parts, each with three complex components, i.e.
each with six real degrees of freedom. Since under parity µνρσ is a
pseudotensor, a parity transformation exchanges the self-dual and
anti-self-dual parts. Comparison with the classiﬁcation of Lorentz
representations in terms of the (j− , j+ ) quantum numbers show
that they are the (0, 1) and (1, 0) representations. Observe that
these representations have complex dimension three.
(iv) In terms of the electric and magnetic ﬁelds E i , B i and of the
variables ai+ = (−1/2)(E i + iB i ), ai− = (−1/2)(E i − iB i ) we can
write F µν = F+µν + F−µν with
⎛

0
⎜ E1
µν
⎜
F =⎝ 2
E
E3
⎛

0
1
⎜
−a
±
F±µν = ⎜
⎝ −a2±
−a3±

−E 1
0
B3
−B 2
a1±
0
±ia3±
∓ia2±

−E 2
−B 3
0
B1

⎞
−E 3
B2 ⎟
⎟,
−B 1 ⎠
0

a2±
∓ia3±
0
±ia1±

⎞
a3±
±ia2± ⎟
⎟.
∓ia1± ⎠
0

(12.9)

The six independent real components of F µν have been written in
terms of the three complex components ai+ of the self-dual tensor
F+µν , and of their complex conjugate ai− which are the components
of the anti-self-dual tensor F−µν . This is not a decomposition into
representations of smaller dimensions. We have just rewritten a
six-dimensional real representation in terms of a three-dimensional
complex representation. Under a general Lorentz transformations
the three components of E i and the three components of B i mix
between themselves, so a real antisymmetric tensor is an irreducible representation of real dimension six.
(2.6) (i) In the (x, y) plane, e1 = (1, 0) → (cos θ, sin θ), e2 = (0, 1) →
(− sin θ, cos θ), e± → e∓iθ e± , so from eq. (2.131) e+ has helicity
h = +1 and e− has h = −1. According to the discussion in
Section 2.7, this means that electromagnetic waves are made of
massless spin-1 particles, the photons.
(ii) The transformation of the tensor hij under rotations in the

Chapter 2 269

270 Solutions to exercises

(x, y) plane is hij → Rik Rjl hkl , i.e. h → RhRT , with




h+ h×
cos θ − sin θ
h=
,
R=
.
h× −h+
sin θ
cos θ

(12.10)

Performing the matrix multiplication we ﬁnd
h× → h× cos 2θ + h+ sin 2θ ,
h+ → −h× sin 2θ + h+ cos 2θ

(12.11)

and therefore (h× ± ih+ ) → e∓2iθ (h× ± ih+ ) which, according to
eq. (2.131), means that they have helicities ±2.

12.3

Chapter 3

(3.1) The dimensions are read from the kinetic terms. For a scalar
(∂µ φ)2 must have dimensions (mass)4 to compensate the factor
d4 x. Since ∂µ ∼ mass, it follows that φ has dimensions of mass.
Similarly Aµ ∼ (mass) and ψ ∼ (mass)3/2 . In d space-time dimensions φ ∼ Aµ ∼ (mass)(d/2)−1 while ψ ∼ (mass)(d−1)/2 .
(3.2) Consider ﬁrst uL . Under a boost of rapidity η along the z axis we
have (see eq. (2.59)) uL → exp{−ησ 3 /2}uL. Use the identity
 σ
|η|
|η|
= cosh
+ η̂ · σ sinh
.
(12.12)
exp η ·
2
2
2
Inverting tanh η = v we get e2η = (1 + v)/(1 − v). From this
1/2

verify that cosh(η/2) = E+m
and therefore sinh(|η|/2) =
2m
 E−m 1/2
.
Pay
attention
to
the
fact
that,
in order to transform a
2m
particle at rest into a particle moving with velocity +v, we must
perform a boost with velocity −v. Then verify that in the boosted
frame

√
1 √
E + m − σ3 E − m ξ .
(12.13)
uL = √
2
Finally verify that, for a particle moving along the z axis,


1 √
1 
√
(12.14)
E±m=
E + p3 ± E − p3 ,
2
2
and therefore eq. (3.103) is recovered. For uR , under boost uR →
exp{+ησ 3 /2}uR and therefore the result is recovered with the replacement p3 → −p3 .
(3.3) (i) dφ must be equal to 1, i.e. to the mass dimensions of φ. Then
µ
∂φ/∂xµ → ∂φ /∂x = e−2α ∂φ/∂xµ and (∂φ)2 cancels the factor
4α
4
e coming from d x. The current is
1
µ
jD
= (φ + xν ∂ν φ)∂ µ φ − xµ ∂ν φ∂ ν φ .
(12.15)
2
(ii) φ2 → e−2α φ2 so d4 x φ2 is not invariant, while d4 x φ4 is invariant. Dilatations are a classical symmetry when there is no intrinsic
mass-scale, so they are broken by a mass term but not by a term
λφ4 since λ is dimensionless.

12.3

(3.4) (i) dA = 1, dψ = 3/2. (ii) From the Noether theorem (and eliminating terms that vanish upon use of the equations of motion)
3
1
µ
= xν (δνµ F 2 − F µρ ∂ν Aρ ) + xν ψ̄iγ µ ∂ν ψ + ψ̄iγ µ ψ − F µρ Aρ .
jD
4
2
(12.16)
After some algebra, this can be rewritten as
µ
=
jD

3 µ
j + xν T µ ν − ∂ρ (F µρ xν Aν )
2

(12.17)

where
1
T µ ν = δνµ F 2 − F µρ Fνρ + ψ̄γ µ (i∂ν − eAν )ψ ,
4

(12.18)

and j µ = iψ̄γ µ ψ is the U (1) current. Since j µ is conserved by itself,
we can redeﬁne the dilatation current subtracting it. Furthermore,
the term ∂ρ (F µρ xν Aν ) does not contribute to the charge since its
µ = 0 component is a total spatial derivative, and also it is sepaµ
.
rately conserved, so we subtract it, too, from the deﬁnition of jD
µ
µ
ν µ
ν
µ
µ
µ
Then jD = x T ν and ∂µ jD = x ∂µ T ν + T µ . The term ∂µ T ν
vanishes because the energy–momentum tensor is conserved, while,
from the above equation, T µ µ = ψ̄γ µ (i∂µ − eAµ )ψ = 0 using the
massless Dirac equation.
µ
(iii) Upon use of the equations of motion of the massive theory, jD
happens to have the same form as in the massless case. However,
again using the equations of motion of the massive theory, now
µ
= T µ µ = mψ̄ψ .
∂µ jD

(12.19)

The invariance under dilatations is broken if the trace of the energy–
momentum tensor is non-vanishing.
(3.5) The two Lagrangians diﬀer by a total derivative,
L = L − (i/2)∂µ (ψ̄γ µ ψ) .

(12.20)

With L, we ﬁnd T µν = iψ̄γ µ ∂ ν ψ. With L , we ﬁnd T  = T µν −
(i/2)∂ ν j µ with j µ = ψ̄γ µ ψ. The extra term (−i/2)∂ ν j µ does
not spoil ∂µ T µν = 0 because ∂µ j µ = 0. The conserved charges
P ν diﬀer by a term proportional to d3 x ∂ ν j 0 . However this is
zero because, if ν is a spatial index, it is a spatial derivative and
then the spatial integral vanishes, assuming as always a suﬃciently
fast decrease of the ﬁelds at inﬁnity. If instead ν = 0 we use
∂0 j 0 = −∂i j i so we get again a spatial divergence. Therefore the
µν
four-momentum computed with T µν and with T  is the same.
(3.6) We denote (t, x) by x. Then the ﬁve-dimensional ﬁeld is φ(x, y).
We impose the boundary condition that φ(x, ±R/2) = 0, corresponding to the fact that the ﬁeld vanishes at the boundary of
space-time. The mode expansion compatible with these boundary
conditions is
∞
 nπy 

,
(12.21)
φn (x) cs
φ(x, y) =
R
n=1
µν

Chapter 3 271

272 Solutions to exercises

where cs(nπy/R) is cos(nπy/R) if n is odd and sin(nπy/R) if n is
even. We therefore have an inﬁnite set of four-dimensional ﬁelds
φn (x). The fact φ(x, y) satisﬁes (25 + m2 )φ = 0 implies that the
ﬁelds φn (x) satisfy

 nπ 2
(12.22)
2 + m2 +
φn (x) = 0
R
and therefore each φn (x), with n = 1, . . . , ∞, describes a fourdimensional particle with mass mn given by m2n = m2 + (nπ/R)2 .
This set of particles is called a Kaluza–Klein (KK) tower. In particular, if the ﬁve-dimensional mass m = 0, then mn = nπ/R and
the KK modes are equally spaced. Therefore the existence of an
extra dimension of size R should manifest itself with the presence
of new particles at an energy scale O(π/R). Since no such particle
is observed up to present accelerator energies E of order of a few
hundreds GeV, we conclude from this that R < π/(500GeV) ∼
10−16 cm.
There is however a subtle way out of this limit. It is in principle
possible (and indeed it is suggested by some theoretical considerations based on string theory) that the extra dimensions are not accessible to particles with the usual weak, electromagnetic or strong
interaction, and that only gravity can propagate in the extra dimensions. In this case we can have a large R. The resulting KK
modes would be light, but they would not be observed at accelerators because they interact too weakly. A limit on R would come
from modiﬁcations of Newton’s law of gravitation. Newton’s law is
well veriﬁed experimentally only down to the millimeter scale (below it is diﬃcult to measure the gravitational force between two
objects, because it is overwhelmed by the van der Waals forces).
Therefore, the bound on extra dimensions in which only gravity
can propagate is of order R < 1 mm (see N. Arkani-Hamed, S. Dimopoulos and G. R. Dvali, Phys. Rev. D59 (1999) 086004).

12.4

Chapter 4

(4.1) (i) The exchange of coordinates gives a factor (−1)L , while the
relative intrinsic parity of a fermion and an antifermion is −1, so
in total we have (−1)L+1 . (ii) Consider e± as two charge state of
the same particle, exchanged by C. Because of Fermi–Dirac statistics, the exchange of two identical fermions gives a minus sign. On
the other hand, this exchange is performed applying the charge
conjugation operator (which gives a factor C), exchanging the coordinates (which gives (−1)L ) and exchanging the spin. The spin
exchange gives (−1)S+1 , i.e. the singlet state S = 0 has an antisymmetric spin wave function, while S = 1 has a symmetric spin
wave function. Therefore C(−1)L (−1)S+1 = −1, and it follows
that C = (−1)L+S . (iii) The ground state of para-positronium has

12.4

L = 0, S = 0 and therefore C = +1. Since the photon has C = −1,
and QED conserves C, it can only decay into an even number of
photons.
(4.2) Perform a boost along the z axis. Since the transverse components
p⊥ of the momentum are not aﬀected, δ (2) (p ⊥ − k⊥ ) is invariant
and we must consider only Ep δ(pz − kz ). Use the form of the
Lorentz transformation of Ep , pz together with the property of
the Dirac delta δ(f (x)) = δ(x − x0 )/|f  (x0 )| (valid when x0 is the
only solution of f (x) = 0).
(4.3) Use the fact that Ψ and Ψ∗ anticommute at equal time, and the
fact that the transpose of γ µ can be written as (γ µ )T = γ 0 γ µ γ 0 ,
as one veriﬁes from the explicit expression of the γ matrices.
(4.4) (i) The mass term breaks gauge-invariance. The Euler–Lagrange
equation is ∂µ F µν +m2 Aν = 0. Acting with ∂ν , using ∂ν ∂µ F µν = 0
and m = 0, gives ∂ν Aν = 0. Using this condition, ∂µ F µν =
∂µ ∂ µ Aν −∂µ ∂ν Aµ reduces to 2Aν and therefore ∂µ F µν +m2 Aν = 0
becomes (2 + m2 )Aµ = 0. (ii) The expansion of Aµ in plane waves
is as in eq. (4.104). However now the condition (2 + m2 )Aµ = 0
imposes p2 = m2 , while ∂ν Aν = 0 gives µ pµ = 0. Therefore
there are three independent solutions for the polarization vectors
µ . Since all our equations are explicitly Lorentz covariant, we
can study the particle content of the theory in the frame that
we prefer and, since m = 0, we can choose the rest frame of the
particle. In this frame p = (m, 0, 0, 0) and the three independent
orthogonal polarization vectors are 1 = (0, 1, 0, 0), 2 = (0, 0, 1, 0)
and 3 = (0, 0, 0, 1); they describe the three spin degrees of freedom
of a massive vector ﬁeld.
(4.5) (i) Acting on a generic multiparticle state |p1 , . . . , pn we have
(2Ep )1/2 e−βH a†p |p1 , . . . , pn
=e

−βH

(12.23)

|p , p1 , . . . , pn

= exp{−β(Ep + Ep1 + . . . + Epn )}|p , p1 , . . . , pn .
On the other hand,
(2Ep )1/2 a†p e−β(H+Ep ) |p1 , . . . , pn

(12.24)

= (2Ep )1/2 a†p e−β(Ep1 +...+Epn +Ep ) |p1 , . . . , pn
= exp{−β(Ep + Ep1 + . . . + Epn )}|p , p1 , . . . , pn ,
so the two expressions coincide on the most general state of the
Fock space. An alternative derivation is obtained deﬁning
f (β) = e−βH a†p − a†p e−β(H+Ep ) .

(12.25)

Clearly, f (0) = 0. Show that [H, a†p ] = Ep a†p , and using this
check that f  (β) = −Hf (β). The solution of this equation, with
the boundary condition f (0) = 0, is f (β) = 0.

Chapter 4 273

274 Solutions to exercises

(ii) Using the above result and the cyclic property of the trace,




Tr e−βH a†p aq = Tr a†p e−β(H+Ep ) aq


(12.26)
= Tr e−β(H+Ep ) aq a†p


= Tr e−β(H+Ep ) (a†p aq + [aq , a†p ]) .
Dividing by Tr e−βH ,
a†p aq β = e−βEp a†p aq β + e−βEp (2π)3 δ (3) (p − q ) .

(12.27)

Solving for a†p aq β we get the desired result. When p = q , in a
ﬁnite volume, use eq. (4.7).
(iii) If a†p and aq obey anticommutation relations, in the last
passage in eq. (12.26) aq a†p is replaced by −a†p aq + {aq , a†p } =
−a†p aq + (2π)3 δ (3) (p − q ) and therefore
a†p aq β = −e−βEp a†p aq β + e−βEp (2π)3 δ (3) (p − q ) , (12.28)
so
a†p aq β =

V
.
eβEp + 1

(12.29)

(4.6) (i) The volume of the phase space is V (4/3)πp3F . Each cell has a
volume h3 = (2π)3 (in our units  = 1) and in each cell, by the
exclusion principle, we can accommodate two electrons, with spin
up and spin down. (ii) When |p | < pF , ap,s destroys a particle
which is present in |0 F , so in this case ap,s |0 F = 0. The fact that
Ap ,s and A†p ,s satisfy the canonical anticommutation relations follows easily from the identities θ(x)θ(x) = θ(x), θ(x)θ(−x) = 0 and
θ(x)+θ(−x) = 1 satisﬁed by the step function. The operator A†p ,s ,
acting on |0 F , creates an electron above the Fermi surface or destroys an electron in the “ﬁlled Fermi sea”. The latter process can
be described as the creation of a “hole” in the Fermi sea, and the
excitation of an electron from a level below pF to a level above pF
can be described as the creation of an electron–hole pair. (iii) For
instance,
{Ap ,s , A†q ,r } = αp α∗q {ap ,s , a†q ,r } + βp βq∗ {a†−p ,−s , a−q ,−r }
= (|αp |2 + |βp |2 )(2π)3 δ (3) (p − q )δrs .

(12.30)

All other relations are proved similarly. (iv)
A†p Ap = |αp |2 a†p ap + |βp |2 ap a†p − αp βp∗ ap ap − α∗p βp a†p a†p .
(12.31)
The terms ap ap and a†p a†p have a vanishing diagonal matrix element. Use |αp |2 = 1 + |βp |2 (since we are now considering bosons)
and, in a unit volume, ap a†p = a†p ap + 1.

12.5

12.5

Chapter 5 275

Chapter 5

(5.1) Using (2x +m2 )φ(x) = 0 and the relations ∂t θ(t) = δ(t), ∂t θ(−t) =
−δ(t) (and therefore ∂t2 θ(t) = δ  (t), ∂t2 θ(−t) = −δ  (t)) we ﬁnd
(2x + m2 ) [θ(t)0|φ(x)φ(0)|0 + θ(−t)0|φ(0)φ(x)|0 ]
= δ  (t)0|[φ(x), φ(0)]|0 + 2δ(t)0|[∂t φ(x), φ(0)]|0 . (12.32)
By deﬁnition of distributions, δ  (t) is deﬁned integrating by parts,
so δ  (t)φ(x) = −δ(t)∂t φ(x). Since δ(t) has support only at t = 0,
the commutator [∂t φ(x), φ(0)] above must be computed at equal
time, and then [∂t φ(x), φ(0)] = −iδ (3) (x ), so we get the desired
result. The derivation with φ(y) (here we set y = 0) replaced
by φ(y1 ) . . . φ(yn ) is obtained similarly, writing explicitly all theta
functions.
In momentum space we ﬁnd (−p2 + m2 )D̃(p) = −i. Formally this
gives D̃(p) = i/(p2 − m2 ), and therefore

i
d4 p
e−ipx .
(12.33)
D(x) =
(2π)4 p2 − m2

However, the integrand has two poles at p0 = ± p 2 + m2 , and
therefore we must also specify how to go around these poles in
the complex p0 plane. For each pole we can go above or below it.
After specifying a prescription, we can then compute the integral
over p0 ,

0
i
dp0 0 2
e−ip t .
(12.34)
2
2
(p ) − p − m
If t > 0 we can close the contour in the lower half plane since, when
0
p0 = −iu with u > 0 then e−ip t = e−ut , which for t > 0 provides
a convergence factor in the integral. Conversely, when t < 0 we
can close the contour in the upper half plane. If we go around both
poles from below, then when t > 0 (i.e. when we close the contour
in the lower half plane) we encircle no pole (see Fig. 12.1), so
the integral vanishes. Therefore, with this prescription, D(t, x ) =
0 for t > 0, and D(x) is called an advanced Green’s function.
Conversely, if we go around both poles from above we ﬁnd that
D(t, x ) = 0 for t < 0, and we have a retarded Green’s function.
The Feynman propagator corresponds to a mixed case, see Fig. 5.1.
(5.2) n(d − 2)  2d. Observe that in d = 2 the ﬁeld φ is dimensionless
and a term λφn is renormalizable by power counting for every n,
so we can take an arbitrary function V (φ) as the potential.
(5.3) The main point is to understand that, in the Wick theorem, we
must omit the contractions between ﬁelds inside a normal ordered
term. For instance, the O(λ) contribution to the mass renormalization, in the theory with interaction (λ/4!) : φ4 :, is proportional
to 0|T {φ(x1 )φ(x2 ) : φ4 (x) :}|0 . From the point of view of the
combinatorics of the Wick theorem, ϕ ≡: φ4 (x) : can be treated

p0

Fig. 12.1 The case when the poles

in the complex p0 -plane are both encircled from below, corresponding to
an advanced Green’s function.

276 Solutions to exercises

just as a single ﬁeld, so for instance
T {φ1 φ2 ϕ(x)} = : φ1 φ2 ϕ(x) : +D12 ϕ(x)

(12.35)

+0|T {φ1 ϕ(x)}|0 φ2 + 0|T {φ2 ϕ(x)}|0 φ1 .
Using 0|T {φi ϕ(x)}|0 = 0 (since it is odd under φ → −φ) one
ﬁnds
T {φ1 φ2 : φ4 :} = : φ1 φ2 φ4 : + D12 : φ4 : ,

(12.36)

and therefore 0|T {φ(x1 )φ(x2 ) : φ4 (x) :}|0 = 0, so there is no
mass renormalization at O(λ). Alternatively, one can write : φ4 (x) :
=: φ(x3 )φ(x4 )φ(x5 )φ(x6 ) : (letting x3 = x4 = x5 = x6 ≡ x at the
end of the calculation) and use eq. (5.85) to express : φ3 φ4 φ5 φ6 :
as T {φ3 φ4 φ5 φ6 } minus the contraction terms, so in turn
T {φ1 φ2 : φ3 φ4 φ5 φ6 :} = T {φ1 φ2 φ3 φ4 φ5 φ6 } − (contractions) .
(12.37)
One can now check explicitly that the “−(contractions)” term
above cancel the terms in T {φ1 . . . φ6 } where we have contractions
between φi φj with i, j = 3, 4, 5, 6.
In general, one can understand from this example that the introduction of the normal ordering in the interaction term eliminates
the tadpole graphs.
(5.4) Setting u = 1/αs , eq. (5.194) becomes
du
b1
= b0 +
.
d log E
u

(12.38)

(i) Neglecting the term ∼ b1 , the solution is u(E) = u(µ) +
b0 log(E/µ). Substituting µ = ΛQCD exp{1/[b0 α(µ)]}, we ﬁnd
u = b0 log(E/ΛQCD ). (ii) We can solve perturbatively inserting
the lowest-order solution into the term ∼ b1 . The equation then
becomes
b1
du
= b0 +
.
(12.39)
d log E
b0 log(E/ΛQCD )
The solution is u(E) = b0 log(E/ΛQCD )+(b1 /b0 ) log log(E/ΛQCD ),
where we have redeﬁned ΛQCD at two loops so that the integration
constant vanishes.

12.6

Chapter 6

(6.1) Use t = (p1 − p3 )2 = m21 + m23 − 2E1 E3 + 2|p1 ||p3 | cos θ. Since
|p3 | and E3 are ﬁxed by energy–momentum conservation, we have
dt = 2|p1 ||p3 |d cos θ. Inserting this into eq. (6.43) (with p1 ≡ p ,
p3 ≡ p  ), integrating over dφ and using eq. (6.42) we get the
desired result.
(6.2) Equation (6.132) is obtained performing a Lorentz boost with velocity −v2 . Since E  , p  are ﬁxed by energy–momentum conservation, only θ is a variable and eq. (6.133) follows. Then dΩ =

12.6

d cos θdφ = 2πdElab /(γ2 v2 |p  |). Inserting this into eq. (6.41) gives
the result. The kinematical limits are obtained setting cos θ = ±1
in eq. (6.132).
√
(6.3) (i) In eq. (6.41) set s  MA (since MA
ω) and, for the photon,
|p  | = ω. (ii) Denoting by Mf i the matrix element with normalization for
√ the√atom equal to one particle in a volume V = 1,
Mf i = 2MA 2MA∗ Mf i  2MA Mf i (since MA∗ − MA = ω
MA ). Using the phase space found above, eq. (6.20) gives
dΓ =

1
ω
(2MA )2 |Mf i |2
dΩ .
2MA
16π 2 MA

(12.40)

MA cancels and we get the desired result. (iii) Use eq. (6.43) with
s = MA2 and Mf i = 2MA Mf i .
(6.4) Denoting by k1 , k2 , p the four-momenta in the CM of the photons
and of the ﬁnal atom, respectively, we have
1 1 d3 k1 d3 k2 d3 p (3)
δ (p + k 1 + k 2 )δ(ω − ω1 − ω2 ) .
2! (2π)5 2ω1 2ω2 2MA
(12.41)
The factor 1/2! takes into account the fact that the two photons
are identical particles. Integrating over d3 p and using the notation
EA∗ − EA = ω,
dΦ(3) =

ω1 dω1 dΩ1 ω2 dω2 dΩ2
δ(ω − ω1 − ω2 )
(2π)5 16MA
1
ω1 (ω − ω1 )dω1 dΩ1 dΩ2 .
=
(2π)5 16MA

dΦ(3) =

(12.42)

Finally, to compute dΓ use Mf i = 2MA Mf i , as in the previous
exercise.
(6.5) Writing explicitly dΦ(j) and dΦ(n−j+1) , the right-hand side of
eq. (6.140) becomes
 ∞ 2 
j
dµ
d3 pi
(12.43)
(2π)4 δ (4) (p1 + . . . + pj − q)
2π i=1 (2π)3 2Ei
0
⎞
⎛
n
3
3

d
p
i
⎠ d q (2π)4 δ (4) (pj+1 + . . . + pn + q − P ) .
×⎝
(2π)3 2Ei (2π)3 2q 0
i=j+1
The ﬁrst Dirac delta forces q = p1 + . . . + pj . Inserting this into
the second Dirac delta, we can rewrite the above expression as
$
 ∞ 2 #
n
dµ
d3 pi
4 (4)
(2π) δ (p1 + . . . + pn − P )
2π
(2π)3 2Ei
0
i=1
×

d3 q
(2π)4 δ (4) (p1 + . . . + pj − q) .
(2π)3 2q 0

(12.44)

Now use the identity
d3 q
= d4 q δ(q 2 − µ2 )θ(q 0 ) ,
2q 0

(12.45)

Chapter 6 277

278 Solutions to exercises
2
2
2
which follows from the fact that,
 by deﬁnition, µ = q0 − q , and
0
2
2
2
the θ function selects q = + q + µ as solutions of q − µ2 = 0.
Then the above expression becomes
 n
 d3 pi
(12.46)
(2π)4 δ (4) (p1 + . . . + pn − P )
(2π)3 2Ei
i=1
 ∞

×
dµ2 d4 q δ(q 2 − µ2 ))θ(q 0 )δ (4) (p1 + . . . + pj − q) .
0
p1

....

p

j−1

pj

q

pj+1
P

pj+2

....
p

n

Fig. 12.2 A graphical representa-

tion of the decomposition of the
phase space given in eq. (6.140).

1

Observe that, if instead of an interaction term gφ1 φ2 Φ with two
diﬀerent ﬁelds φ1 , φ2 , we were to
take a single φ ﬁeld, with interaction
Lagrangian gφ2 Φ, there would be
an additional factor of two in the
amplitude, because when we compute
0|T {φ2 (x)Φ(x)φ2 (y)Φ(y)}|0 there are
two possible contractions: we can contract the ﬁrst φ(x) with the ﬁrst φ(y)
(and therefore the second φ(x) with
the second φ(y)) or the ﬁrst φ(x) with
the second φ(y). If instead we have
0|T{φ1 (x)φ2 (x)Φ(x)φ1 (y)φ2 (y)Φ(y)}|0
and a Lagrangian whose kinetic term
does not mix φ1 and φ2 , we can only
contract φ1 (x) with φ1 (y) and φ2 (x)
with φ2 (y).

The last two integrals give

 ∞
dµ2 δ(q 2 − µ2 )
d4 q θ(q 0 )δ (4) (p1 + . . . + pj − q)
0

= d4 q θ(q 0 )δ (4) (p1 + . . . + pj − q) = 1 ,
(12.47)
and the desired result follows. Diagrammatically, we can represent
eq. (6.140) as in Fig. 12.2, so this representation of the phase space
is useful to discuss a process in which the n-body decay of the
initial particle goes through a resonance of mass µ which later
decays into j particles.
(6.6) (i) Denoting by p the external momentum and by q and p − q the
momenta in the loop, the graph gives1

i
i
d4 q
. (12.48)
iM = (−ig)2
(2π)4 q 2 − m2 + i (q − p)2 − m2 + i
In the rest frame of the initial particle, p = (MR , 0), where MR
is the (renormalized) mass of Φ. Then the poles in the integrand
0
are at q 0 = Eq − i, q 0 = −Eq + i,
 q = MR + Eq − i and
0
q = MR − Eq + i, where Eq = + q 2 + m2 . In the complex
q 0 -plane we can close the integration contour both in the lower
or in the upper half-plane. Choosing for instance the lower-half
plane, we pick the residues of the poles at q 0 = Eq − i and at
q 0 = MR + Eq − i, and we get


 3
1
d q
1
1
+
M = −g 2
.
(2π)3 2MR Eq MR − 2Eq + i MR + 2Eq − i
(12.49)
In the second fraction we can set  = 0 since the denominator
never vanishes. In the ﬁrst we use the identity
1
1
= P ∓ iπδ(x) ,
x ± i
x

(12.50)

where P denotes the principal part. Then we get an imaginary
contribution to M,

1
d3 q
Im M = πg 2
δ(MR − 2Eq ) .
(12.51)
(2π)3 2MR Eq

12.7

Chapter 7 279


Since Eq = q 2 + m2  m, when MR < 2m the Dirac delta is
never satisﬁed, and the imaginary part vanishes. Instead, when
MR  2m, performing the integral with the help of the delta
function gives
.
g2
4m2
Im M =
1−
.
(12.52)
16π
MR2
(ii) In Section 5.5.2 we have seen that the one-loop correction to the
propagator produces a shift of the mass squared (see eqs. (5.108)
and (5.112), and observe that the loop correction to the propagator, denoted here by iM, is the quantity denoted as −iB in
eq. (5.108), so B = −M), so
M 2 → M 2 − M = M 2 − ReM − i ImM.

(12.53)

The renormalized mass is given by MR2 = M 2 − ReM, and the
quantity that appears in the denominator of the propagator, after
inclusion of loop corrections, is therefore M 2 = MR2 − iImM. On
the other hand, from eq. (6.52), M 2 = MR2 − iMR Γ. Therefore we
expect that MR Γ = ImM.
(iii) To verify this, we compute Γ explicitly. The amplitude for
the process Φ → φ1 φ2 is (−g) and therefore, using the phase space
(6.35),
.
.
g2
4m2
4m2
1
2 4π
(−g)
=
. (12.54)
1−
1−
Γ=
2
2
2MR
32π
MR
16πMR
MR2
Comparing with eq. (12.52) we see that indeed MR Γ = ImM.
Observe that in this theory g has dimensions of mass, so Γ has the
correct dimensions.

12.7

Chapter 7

(7.1) (i) See Fig. 12.3. (ii) If s1 , s2 are the initial spins and λ1 , λ2 the
ﬁnal helicities,


1
e4
|Me+ e− →2γ |2 = Tr ( p1 + me )Lµν ( p2 − me )L†µν
4
4
s1 ,s2 ,λ1 ,λ2

(12.55)
where p1 is the momentum of the electron, p2 of the positron, k1 , k2
of the two photons, and
Lµν = γ µ

1
1
γν + γν
γµ .
 p1 −  k 1 − me
 p1 −  k 2 − me

(12.56)

In the limit p → 0, after long but straightforward algebra, the
computation of the trace gives

1
|Me+ e− →2γ |2 = 32π 2 α2 .
(12.57)
4
s1 ,s2 ,λ1 ,λ2

Fig. 12.3 The two Feynman diagrams for e+ e− → γγ to lowest order.

280 Solutions to exercises

To simplify the algebra, work directly in the CM, in the limit
p → 0 (so that the photon energies are ω1 = ω2  me ) and
contract the γ matrices
with repeated indices. For instance, using

γµ γ µ = (γ0 )2 − i (γi )2 = 4, one ﬁnds
γµ γ ν γ µ = γµ ({γ ν , γ µ } − γ µ γ ν ) = γµ 2η µν − 4γ ν = −2γ ν . (12.58)
In this way one can prove the useful identities
γ µ Aγµ = −2A ,

γ µ A Bγµ = 4(AB) ,

γ µ A B Cγµ = −2 C B A .
(12.59)
Use also the cyclic property of the trace to bring closer γ matrices
with repeated indices.
(iii) In the CM (considering for generality two particles with different masses m1 , m2 ), p1 = (E1 , p ), p2 = (E2 , −p ), and
I 2 = (p1 p2 )2 − m21 m22
= (E1 E2 + p 2 )2 − (E12 − p 2 )(E22 − p 2 )
= p 2 (E1 + E2 )2 .

(12.60)

Therefore


I = |p |(E1 + E2 ) = E1 E2 |p |

1
1
+
E1
E2

= E1 E2 (|v1 | + |v2 |) ,


(12.61)

where v1 , v2 are the respective velocities in the CM. The relative
velocity has modulus v = |v1 | + |v2 |, so I = E1 E2 v. The result for
σ then follows from the general formula (6.29), using eq. (12.57)
and two-body phase space (6.35) with m = 0.
(7.2) (i) From Exercise 4.1 we know that an e+ e− pair can annihilate
into two photons only if it has S = 0; since we are considering a
bound state with L = 0, then also J = 0. Alternatively, the result
follows from the fact that a two-photon state cannot have J = 1,
see Landau and Lifshitz, vol. IV (1982), Section 9 for the proof.
Equation (7.70) then follows from
⎤
⎡

1 ⎣ (J=0)
+
σ (J=1) ⎦ ,
(12.62)
σ̄ =
σ
4
Jz =−1,0,1

and σ (J=1) = 0. (ii) Equations (7.72) and (7.73) follow immediately from eq. (6.8), with V = 1. (iii):
 3
d p1 d3 p2
2γ|Pos =
2γ|p1 , p2 p1 , p2 |Pos .
(12.63)
(2π)3 (2π)3
In the CM,
p1 , p2 |Pos = (2π)3 δ (3) (p1 + p2 )ψ̃(p1 )

(12.64)

12.8

where ψ̃(p ) is the wave function of positronium in momentum
space, so

d3 p
2γ|p , −p ψ̃(p ) .
(12.65)
2γ|Pos =
(2π)3
(iv) From the order-of-magnitude estimates in the Introduction
we know that in the hydrogen atom v ∼ α and |p | ∼ me α (for
positronium me becomes the reduced mass me /2). Then, to lowest
order in α, in eq. (7.74) we can approximate 2γ|p , −p with its
value at p
me and extract it from the integral. The remaining
integral is ψ(x ) at x = 0. Equation (7.76) then follows from
eqs. (7.72) and (7.73), recalling that only J = 0 contributes.
(v) The agreement is at the level of 0.5%. Including the ﬁrst
radiative correction, the theoretical prediction turns out to be



1
α
π2
Γ = me α5 1 −
5−
(12.66)
2
π
4
and agrees with experiment, within the error (see D.W. Gidley et
al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 49 (1982) 525).

12.8

Chapter 8

(8.1) (i) Compare with Solved Problem 7.2 on page 188. (ii) The max2
imum value of q 2 is qmax
= (mn − mp )2  (1.3 MeV)2 (see e.g.
Solved Problem 6.1). The typical scale of variation of the form
factors is instead of order of the QCD scale, so qtypical ∼ a few
hundred MeV. (iii):
Mf i = −

GF cos θC
√
ūe γ µ (1 − γ 5 )uν̄ ūp γµ (1 − gA γ 5 )un .
2

(12.67)

Averaging over the initial spin and summing over the ﬁnal spins,
G2F cos2 θC
Tr[( pe + me )γ µ (1 − γ 5 ) pν̄ (1 + γ 5 )γ ν ]
2
 p + mn
(1 + gA γ 5 )γ ν ] .
×Tr[( pp + mp )γµ (1 − gA γ 5 ) n
2
(12.68)
Performing the traces,
|Mf i |2 =

|Mf i |2 = 16 G2F cos2 θC [(1 + gA )2 (pe pp )(pν̄ pn )
(12.69)
2
2
+(1 − gA ) (pe pn )(pν̄ pp ) − (1 − gA )mp mn (pe pν̄ )] .
We next compute the scalar products in the neutron rest frame,
pn = (mn , 0). Observe that the maximum proton energy is
Epmax =

m2n + m2p − m2e
∆2 − m2e
= mp +
,
2mn
2mn

(12.70)

with ∆ = mn − mp . Since (∆2 − m2e )/(2mn ) ∼ 10−4 MeV, we
can neglect it with respect to mn ∼ 103 MeV and, in the scalar

Chapter 8 281

282 Solutions to exercises

products, we can set the proton energy Ep to the ﬁxed value Ep 
mp . For the same reason, we can write (pe pp ) = Ee Ep − pe ·pp 
Ee mp , since |pp |
mp . With this and similar approximations in
the other scalar products,
|Mf i |2 = 16 G2F cos2 θC mp mn



2
2
×[(1 + 3gA
)Ee Eν̄ + (1 − gA
)

(12.71)
Ee2 − m2e Eν̄ cos θ] ,

where θ is the angle between the electron and the antineutrino.
The width is given by
dΓ =

d3 pe
d3 pν̄
d3 pp
1
|Mf i |2
3
3
2mn
(2π) 2mp (2π) 2Ee (2π)3 2Eν̄

(12.72)

×(2π)4 δ (3) (pp + pe + pν̄ )δ(mp + Ee + Eν̄ − mn ) .
Integrate ﬁrst over d3 pp with the help of the δ (3) . Write d3 pe =
4πp2e dpe and d3 pν̄ = 2πEν̄2 dEν̄ d cos θ. Integrate over dEν̄ with the
help of the remaining Dirac delta and ﬁnally perform the integration over d cos θ, between cos θ = ±1. The term linear in cos θ in
|Mf i |2 integrates to zero and the constant part gives the desired
result.
(iv) The kinematical limits on Ee are Eemin = me and
Eemax =

dΓ
__
dEe

me

Ee

∆

Fig. 12.4 The Fermi spectrum of β-

decay.

m2n − m2p + m2e
∆2 − m2e
=∆−
 ∆.
2mn
2mn

(12.73)

The spectrum is shown in Fig. 12.4. When mν = 0, at Ee  ∆ we
have dΓ/dEe ∼ (∆ − Ee )2 and therefore the slope of the spectrum,
d2 Γ/dEe2 , goes to zero as Ee → ∆. For a small non-zero value of
mν we can use the same expression for the matrix element and
take into account mν = 0 just in the phase space. The result is
that now the slope diverges (d2 Γ/dEe2 → −∞) at the end-point of
the spectrum.
(v) Integrating over Ee ,
 1

G2F ∆5 cos2 θC
2
2
(1
+
3g
)
dx
x(1
−
x)
x2 − (me /∆)2 .
Γ=
A
2π 3
me /∆
(12.74)
If me = 0 the integral can be computed analytically, and is equal
to 1/30. For the physical values of me , ∆, numerical integration
gives 0.472565/30, and
G2F ∆5 cos2 θC
2
(1 + 3gA
).
(12.75)
60π 3
Inserting the numerical values, we get a result for τ = 1/Γ larger
by about 8% than the experimental value. A more accurate computation requires us to keep all six form factors. Furthermore, an
important correction comes from the exchange of photons between
the electron and the proton; these Coulomb corrections between ﬁnal states are large when, as in the present case, the relative speed
of the ﬁnal charged particles is small.
Γ = 0.472565

12.8

(8.2) (i) Using the same considerations as in Solved Problem 7.2, the
most general parametrization of a vector current is
e− |j µ (0)|µ− = f1 (q 2 )ūe γ µ uµ + f2 (q 2 )ūe σ µν qν uµ + f3 (q 2 )q µ ūe uµ .
(12.76)
Imposing current conservation gives
qµ (f1 (q 2 )ūe γ µ uµ +f2 (q 2 )ūe σ µν qν uµ +f3 (q 2 )q µ ūe uµ ) = 0 . (12.77)
In the ﬁrst term we use the equations of motion together with
q = k − p, where p and k are the electron and muon four-momenta,
respectively. This gives ūe qµ γ µ uµ = (mµ −me )ūe uµ . In the second
term σ µν qν qµ = 0 by symmetry, so we get
f1 (q 2 )(mµ − me ) + q 2 f3 (q 2 ) = 0 .

(12.78)

Setting q 2 = 0 (which is the value of q 2 in which we are interested,
since the photon is on-shell) we ﬁnd that f1 (0) = 0.
(ii) The amplitude is obtained multiplying by ∗µ . Since ∗µ (q)q µ =
0, only the term ∼ f2 (0) survives.
(iii)
|Mf i |2 =

e2
|F2 |2 ∗µ ρ qν qσ (ūe σ µν uµ ) (ūµ σ ρσ ue ) .
4m2µ

(12.79)

Perform the sum over the photon polarizations using ∗µ ρ → −ηµρ .
To perform the sum over the spin of e− and the average over the
spin of µ− one could replace here ue ūe →  p + me and uµ ūµ → ( k +
mµ )/2. The resulting trace apparently has up to six γ matrices but
can be simpliﬁed using the γ matrix identities given in eq. (12.59).
However, the calculation is much simpler if instead we eliminate
immediately σ µν from |Mf i |2 using the Gordon identity, eq. (7.51);
then we get
e2
|F2 |2
(12.80)
8m2µ
×Tr [( p + me )(Qµ − mγ µ )( k + mµ )(Qµ − mγµ )] ,

|Mf i |2 = −

with Q = p + k and m = me + mµ . Computing the trace and the
resulting scalar products (we need only 2(pk) = m2e + m2µ ),
|Mf i |2 =

e2
|F2 |2 (m2µ − m2e )2 ,
2m2µ

(12.81)

and the result for Γ follows immediately. The resulting bound on
|F2 | is |F2 | < 1 × 10−13 .
Supersymmetric extensions of the SM predict a non-zero decay rate
for µ− → e− γ, at a level not far from the experimental bound.
Actually, in this case the eﬀective current jµ that mediates the
transition has a structure V − A rather than a pure vector current
as we have taken in this exercise. The modiﬁcation to the calculation amounts simply to the insertion of a projector (1 − γ 5 )/2
between ūe and uµ .

Chapter 8 283

284 Solutions to exercises

(8.3) (i) From the form of the Lagrangian, we see that the amplitude
is proportional to GF and therefore σ ∼ G2F . Since GF is the
inverse of a √
mass squared, and the only other energy scale is the
CM energy s, for dimensional reasons we must have σ ∼ G2F s.
(ii) The amplitude is M = MW + MZ with
GF
MW = − √ [ν̄e γµ (1 − γ 5 )e][ēγ µ (1 − γ 5 )νe ] ,
(12.82)
2
GF
MZ = − √ [ν̄e γµ (1 − γ 5 )νe ][a2 ēγ µ (1 − γ 5 )e + a3 ēγ µ (1 + γ 5 )e)] ,
2
e_

νe
W

e

+

_

νe

Fig. 12.5 The eνe scattering ampli-

tude mediated by the W boson.
νe

νe
Z
e

_

0

e

_

Fig. 12.6 The eνe scattering ampli-

tude mediated by the Z boson.

with a2 , a3 given in eq. (8.19); we already set a1 = 1/2, and we took
into account that the term jµ0 j 0,µ produces two equal contributions
to the process, one in which the neutrino current is provided by
the ﬁrst jµ0 (and therefore the electron current by the second) and
one in which the neutrino current is provided by the second factor
j 0,µ . At a fundamental level, MW and MZ correspond to the
graphs in Figs. 12.5 and 12.6.
Performing the Fierz rearrangement in MW , we get
GF
(12.83)
M = − √ [ν̄e γµ (1 − γ 5 )νe ]
2
1
×[( + sin2 θW )ēγ µ (1 − γ 5 )e + sin2 θW ēγ µ (1 + γ 5 )e)] .
2
The computation of |M|2 , with the usual average and sum over
spins, and the subsequent computation of the scalar product in
the CM frame is now rather straightforward, and the result is
#
$
2
1
G2F s
1
2
4
+ sin θW
+ sin θW
σ(νe e → νe e) =
π
2
3
 0.176 G2F s .

(12.84)

(8.4) (i) Use eq. (6.21) with n02 dV = 1 (since we are considering a single
target particle) and Γ = dN/dt.
(ii) n ∼ T 3 follows from dimensional considerations if m
T,
since then T is the only mass-scale and dimensionally n = 1/volume
= (mass)3 . Of course, it can also be obtained explicitly from the
Boltzmann, Bose–Einstein or Fermi–Dirac distributions.
From the previous exercise, σ ∼ G2F s. At a temperature T much
larger than all the masses in question, s ∼ T 2 . Furthermore we
have seen that n ∼ T 3 , while for relativistic particles v = 1, so
Γ = nσv ∼ G2F T 5 and Γ/H ∼ (G2F T 5 )/(T 2 /MPl ) ∼ (T /1 MeV)3 .
Therefore for T
MeV neutrino–electron scattering maintained
the neutrinos in equilibrium, while when the temperature of the
Universe dropped around O(1) MeV the neutrinos decoupled. Observe that when T ∼ MeV the electron mass is not negligible compared to T , but T ∼ me so we still have only one mass-scale and
the estimate s ∼ T 2 is still correct.

Bibliography
The literature on quantum ﬁeld theory and related topics is vast. Here
we collect only a few general references that we ﬁnd especially useful.
More references on speciﬁc topics are given in the Further Reading
sections, at the end of most chapters.
Coleman, S. (1985). Aspects of Symmetry: Selected Erice Lectures.
Cambrigde University Press, Cambridge.
Di Giacomo, A., Paﬀuti, G. and Rossi, P. (1994). Selected Problems in
Theoretical Physics (With Solutions). World Scientiﬁc, Singapore.
Georgi, H. (1984). Weak Interactions and Modern Particle Theory.
Benjamin/Cummings, Menlo Park, CA.
Georgi, H. (1999). Lie Algebras in Particle Physics, 2nd edition. Perseus
Books, Reading, MA.
Itzykson, C. and Zuber, J.-B. (1980). Quantum Field Theory. McGrawHill, Singapore.
Jackson, J. D. (1975). Classical Electrodynamics. Wiley, Chichester.
Kolb, E. W. and Turner, M. S. (1990). The Early Universe. AddisonWesley, Reading, MA.
Landau, L. D. and Lifshitz, E. M. (1979). Course of Theoretical Physics,
vol.II: The Classical Theory of Fields. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
Landau, L. D. and Lifshitz, E. M. (1977). Course of Theoretical Physics,
vol.III: Quantum Mechanics: Non-Relativistic Theory. Pergamon
Press, Oxford.
Landau, L. D. and Lifshitz, E. M. (1982). Course of Theoretical Physics,
vol.IV (by Berestetskij, V. B., Lifshitz, E. M. and Pitaevskij, L. P.):
Quantum Electrodynamics. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
Mandl, F. and Shaw, G. (1984). Quantum Field Theory. Wiley, Chichester.
Nakahara, M. (1990). Geometry, Topology and Physics. IOP Publishing, Bristol.
Okun, L. B. (1982). Leptons and Quarks. North-Holland, Amsterdam.
Parisi, G. (1988). Statistical Field Theory. Addison-Wesley, Redwood.
Perkins, D. H. (2000). Introduction to High Energy Physics, 4th edition.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Peskin M. E. and Schroeder D. V. (1995). An Introduction to Quantum
Field Theory. Perseus Books, Reading, MA.
Polchinski, J. (1998). String Theory, vol. I. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.

286 Bibliography

Ramond, P. (1990). Field Theory: A Modern Primer, 2nd edition.
Addison-Wesley, Redwood.
Weinberg, S. (1995). The Quantum Theory of Fields. vol. 1: Foundations. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Weinberg, S. (1996). The Quantum Theory of Fields. vol. 2: Modern
Applications, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Zinn-Justin, J. (2002). Quantum Field Theory and Critical Phenomena.
Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Index
c-numbers, 64
Cabibbo angle, 198
Cabibbo–Kobayashi–Maskawa matrix, 198
Callan–Symanzik equation, 149
Casimir operators, 16
Poincaré group, 37
Charge conjugation, 28, 33, 93–94,
181–182
photon, 100, 182
Charged currents, 198
Chiral symmetry, 62, 209–212
in QCD, 248–250, 258
Classical electromagnetism, 65–72
Classical ﬁeld theory, 43–72
Coleman–Weinberg eﬀective potential, 257
Compton radius, 5
Cooper pairs, 261
Correlation functions
in statistical mechanics, 231
Correlation length, 232
Cosmic microwave background, 12
Cosmological constant, 141–143
Coulomb potential, xiv, 170
Coupling constants, 142
bare, 136, 138
bare vs. renormalized, 138
in Feynman rules, 127
renormalizable, 140
running of, 146–151
Coupling to the EM ﬁeld, 69–72
Covariant derivative, 70
non-abelian, 246
Covariant quantization of EM ﬁeld,
101–105
CPT theorem, 95
Critical indices, 233
Critical phenomena, 232–238
Cross–section, 158–160
Current conservation, see Noether’s
theorem
Cutoﬀ, infrared, 84
Cutoﬀ, ultraviolet, 130, 135
CVC, 209–212

Action principle, 43–46
Active transformations, 20
Adjoint representation, see Representations, adjoint
α (ﬁne-structure constant), xiv, 2
running of, 151
αs (alpha strong), 151
running of, 152
Amputated diagrams, 127
Anomalous dimension, 150
Anomalous magnetic moment, 73–
74, 192–193
of electron, 2
of muon, 2, 11
Anomaly, 100, 185
Anti-unitary operators, 94
Anticommutation relations, 88
Antiparticles, 86
Asymptotic freedom, 146, 151, 152,
238
Axial current, 63, 198, 207, 209–
212
Bare couplings, 136
Bare ﬁelds, 136, 137
Bare Green’s functions, 147
Bare mass, 136
Barn, 9
Beta decay, 217, 281–282
Beta function, 148–151, 237–238
for λφ4 , 130
Bilinears of Dirac ﬁelds, 61
Binding energy
hydrogen, 6
nuclei, 8
Block spin transformation, 234
Bogoliubov transformation, 107
Bohr radius, 6
Boosts, 17
generators, 19
Born approximation, 167–170, 173–
177
Bose–Einstein statistics, 86
Branching ratio, 10
Breit–Wigner distribution, 163–166

287

288 Index
Dalitz plot, 171–173
De Broglie wavelength, 10
Decay rates, 156–158
Decays
K 0 → π − l+ νl , 212–216
µ− → e− γ, 217, 283
µ− → e− ν̄e νµ , 200, 202–205
n → p e− ν̄e , 217, 281–282
π + → l+ νl , 205–209
π 0 → 2γ, 72, 182
π 0 → 3γ, 182
Positronium, 106, 194
Degree of divergence, 139, 183
Dilatation symmetry, 81, 271
Dimensional regularization, 185
Dirac adjoint, 58
Dirac delta
integral representation, xiii
relation to ∇2 (1/r), 77
Dirac equation, 56–58
in electromagnetic ﬁeld, 71
non-relativistic limit, 73–74
plane wave solutions, 59
Dirac ﬁeld, 32–33
quantized, 88–90
Dirac Hamiltonian, 89
Dirac matrices, see γ matrices
Dirac monopole, 66
Dirac, P.A.M., 73, 219
Disconnected diagrams, 124
Divergences, infrared, 8
Divergences, ultraviolet, 128–131,
135–140, 183–186
Dual ﬁeld strength tensor, 66
Dyson, F., 144
e (electron charge), xiv
Eﬀective ﬁeld theory, 145
Electromagnetic ﬁeld
classical, 65–72
quantized, 96–105
Electromagnetism, conventions, xiv
Electron self-energy, 184
Electroweak theory, 195–216, 263
Energy localization in ﬁeld theory,
69
Energy–momentum tensor, 49–50
for electromagnetic ﬁeld, 68
for scalar ﬁeld, 52
for spinor ﬁeld, 55
improved, 50
Euclidean action, 229

Euclidean propagator, 230
Euler–Lagrange equations, 44–46
Extra dimensions, 4, 82, 272
fπ (pion decay constant), 207
Families
leptons, 197
neutrinos, 56
quarks, 197
fermi (unit of length), 5
Fermi constant, see GF
Fermi Lagrangian, 201
Fermi momentum, 107
Fermi theory of weak interaction,
3, 195–216
Fermi vacuum, 107
Feynman diagrams, 122–135
1PI, 138
Feynman gauge, 180
Feynman propagator, 120–122
Dirac ﬁeld, 132
massive gauge boson, 200
photon, 133
scalar ﬁeld, 122, 132
Feynman rules, 127, 131–135
Feynman, R.P., 144, 219, 222
Field-strength renormalization, see
Wave function renormalization
Fierz identity, 218
Fine structure, 7, 74–79
Fine structure constant, see α
First quantization, 1
of Dirac equation, 73–79
Fixed points of RG transformation,
235–238
infrared, 237
ultraviolet, 237
Flavor symmetries, 209–212
Fock space, 83–86
Form factors
electromagnetic, 188–193
hadronic, 213
Friedmann–Robertson–Walker metric, 141
Functional derivative, 226
Functional integral, see Path integral
Furry’s theorem, 183
GF (Fermi constant), 201, 205
γ (Callan–Symanzik function), 149
γ matrices, xii

Index 289
chiral representation, xiii, 57
standard representation, xiii,
59
traces, xiii, 188
Gauge ﬁxing, 180
Gauge transformation, 66
non-abelian, 243–247
Gaussian integrals, multi-dimensional,
227
Generating functional, 226
Generators
of SU (N ), 244
of Lie groups, 14
of Lorentz group, 18
Gluons, 248
Goldstone bosons, 256–258
Goldstone theorem, 257
Gordon identity, 190
Gravitational waves, helicity, 42,
269
Gravitons, 40
Gravity
non-renormalizable, 145
Green’s function, 116
Groups
non-abelian, 16
non-compact, 27
Gupta–Bleuler quantization, see Covariant quantization of EM
ﬁeld
Gyromagnetic ratio, 2, 73–74, 192–
193
Hadrons, 9, 199, 211, 248
Hard breaking of symmetries, 261
Heisenberg picture, 111
Heisenberg, W., 144
Helicity, 54
of the photon, 67, 98–100
of Weyl spinors, 55, 57
Higgs boson, 3
Higgs mass
and ﬁne tuning, 143
Higgs mechanism, see Spontaneous
symmetry breaking
Hydrogen atom
energy levels, 79
Hyperﬁne structure, 79
Instantons, 239–241
Interaction picture, 117–118, 120
Invariant mass, 172
Irrelevant operators, 235

Ising model, 232
Isospin, 210, 250
violation, 211
Jacobi identity, 22
Kadanoﬀ, L., 234
Kaluza–Klein modes, 82, 272
Klein–Gordon equation, 51
scalar product, 52
Lamb shift, 79
ΛQCD , 154
Landau gauge, 180
Landau levels, 80
Landau pole, 151
Lattice regularization, 230
Leading logarithms approximation,
151
LEP, 3
Lepton number, 65
Leptons, 197–201
Lie groups, 13–16
compactness, 16
structure constants, 15
Light–light scattering, 184
Little group, 37
Lorentz gauge, 67
Lorentz group, 16–34
LSZ reduction formula, 111–116
Mf i (scattering amplitude), 127
Magnetic moment, see Gyromagnetic ratio
Majorana ﬁeld, 33
Majorana mass, 63
Mandelstam variables, 161, 171
Mass renormalization, 136
Maxwell equations, 65, 66
Maxwell stress-tensor, 68
Mean free path, 12
Meissner eﬀect, 261
Mesons, 212, 248
Minimal coupling, 72
Monte Carlo simulations, 230
Natural units  = c = 1, 4–5
Neutral currents, 199
Neutrino
helicity, 40
masses, 56, 65
oscillations, 3
sterile, 65

290 Index
Noether’s current, 49
Noether’s theorem, 46–50
Non-abelian ﬁeld strength, 247
Non-abelian gauge ﬁelds, 245
Non-abelian gauge theories, 243–
252
Non-minimal coupling, 72
Non-perturbative eﬀects, 206
Non-perturbative methods, 228–241
Non-renormalizable theories, 139,
144–146
Normal ordering, 85
ΩΛ , 142
One-loop vertex in QED, 184
One-particle irreducible graphs, 138
Optical theorem, 164, 179
Order parameter, 255
Parity, 32
intrinsic, 91
bosons, 93
fermions, 93
Majorana fermions, 92, 93
photon, 100
violation in weak interactions,
200
Partial width, 10
Path integral, 219–242
Pauli matrices, xiii, 25
Pauli, W., 144
Pauli–Lubanski four-vector, 37
Pauli–Villars regularization, 185
PCAC, 212
Phase space, 158
recursive relation, 179, 278
three-body, 171–173
two-body, 160–162
Photon, 40, 98, 103, 105
charge conjugation, 100
helicity, 67, 98–100
in external legs, 135
mass and gauge invariance, 181
parity, 100
propagator, 133
self-energy, 184
sum over polarizations, 97, 101,
218
π 0 , electromagnetic interaction, 72
Pion decay constant, see fπ
Pions, as Goldstone bosons, 258
Planck mass, 10
Planck units, 11

Poincaré group, 34–40
Polarizations, sum over
for fermions, 61, 202
for photons, 97, 101, 218
Positronium, 106, 194
Poynting vector, 68
Proca equation, 107, 260
Proca Lagrangian, 107
Propagator, see Feynman propagator
QCD, 206, 210, 248–250
QED, 180–188
QFT at ﬁnite temperature, 238
Quarks, 112, 197–201, 248
conﬁnement, 147, 206
electric charges, 197
masses, 206
spectator, 212
Radiation gauge, 67
Rapidity, 18, 41
Rationalized Gaussian units, xiv
Renormalizability, 140, 144
Renormalization, 135–140
and spontaneous symmetry breaking, 261
of QED, 183–186
Renormalization group, 146–151
in statistical mechanics, 233–
238
Renormalized Green’s functions, 147
Representations
SO(3), 22
SU (2), 25
adjoint, 21
decomposition, 21
equivalent, 14
fundamental, 21
inﬁnite-dimensional, 30
reducible, 14, 20
spinorial, 24
unitary, 15, 27
Resonances, 9, 163–166, 173
Running coupling constants, 146–
151
Rydberg, 6
S-matrix, 109–111
Scalar electrodynamics, 71
Scattering
e− A → e− A∗ , 173–177
e+ e− → 2γ, 193, 279

Index 291
e+ e− → γ → µ+ µ− , 186–188
e− γ → e− γ, 7–8, 266
e− νe → e− νe , 218, 284
Schrödinger picture, 109
Schwinger, J., 144, 193
Semileptonic decays, 212
SO(3, 1), 16–18
Soft breaking of symmetries, 261
Spin, 25, 26
from Noether’s theorem, 31
of Dirac ﬁelds, 90
of Lorentz representations, 26
photon, 100
Spin-statistics theorem, 86, 88
Spontaneous symmetry breaking, 253–
265
in the Standard Model, 263
Standard Model, see Electroweak
theory, QCD
Stokes theorem, 45
String theory, 4, 142
critical dimension, 100
Strong interactions, 8, 209, 211, 243,
248
SU (2), 25
SU (N ), 244
Sun, escape time of photons, 12
Superconductivity, 261
and Higgs mechanism, 261
T-product, 114
Tachyons, 37
Tensors, 20–24
invariant, 24
self-dual, 21, 42, 268–269
Thermal quantum ﬁeld theory, 107
Thomson cross-section, 7, 266
Time-reversal, 94
and reality of form factors, 213–
214
Tomonaga, S., 144
Tunneling, 239–241
U (1) gauge symmetry, 70, 181
U (1) charge, 53, 87, 90, 181
Universality classes, 236
Vacuum energy, 85, 141–143
van der Waals forces, 170
Vector current, 63, 198, 207, 209–
212
W boson, 199, 200

mass, 200, 262–264
propagator, 200
Wave function renormalization, 112,
137
Weak decays, 10, 202–216
Weak interactions, see Electroweak
Theory, Fermi Lagrangian
Weinberg angle, 199, 264
Weyl equation, 54
Weyl ﬁeld, 31
quantized, 90–91
Weyl spinors, 27
Wick rotation, 130
Wick’s theorem, 122
Width, see Decay rates, Breit–Wigner
distribution
Wigner theorem, 36
Wilson, K., 144, 231, 242
WMAP, 153
Yang–Mills theories, see Non-abelian
gauge theories
Yukawa potential, 9, 170
Z boson, 199
mass, 200, 262–264
width, 243

